272
The Invasion of Tabuk 
in Rajab, in the Year 9 A.H. 
The invasion and the conquest of Makkah was considered a decisive one between the 
truth and the error. As a result of which, the Arabs had no more doubt in 
Muhammad’s mission. Thus we see that things went contrary to the pagans’ 
expectations. People started to embrace Islam, the religion of Allâh, in great 
numbers. This is manifested clearly in the chapter — The delegations, of this book. It 
can also be deduced out of the enormous number of people who shared in the 
Hajjatul-Wadâ‘ (Farewell Pilgrimage). All domestic troubles came to an end. Muslims, 
eventually felt at ease and started setting up the teachings of Allâh’s Laws and 
intensifying the Call to Islam.  
The underlying Reasons 
The Byzantine power, which was considered the greatest military force on earth at 
that time, showed an unjustifiable opposition towards Muslims. As we have already 
mentioned, their opposition started at killing the ambassador of the Messenger of 
Allâh [pbuh], Al-Harith bin ‘Umair Al-Azdi, by Sharhabeel bin ‘Amr Al-Ghassani. The 
ambassador was then carrying a message from the Prophet [pbuh] to the ruler of 
Busra. We have also stated that the Prophet consequently dispatched a brigade 
under the command of Zaid bin Haritha, who had a fierce fight against the 
Byzantines at Mu’tah. Although Muslim forces could not have revenge on those 
haughty overproud tyrants, the confrontation itself had a great impression on the 
Arabs, all over Arabia. 
Caesar — who could neither ignore the great benefit that Mu’tah Battle had brought 
to Muslims, nor could he disregard the Arab tribes’ expectations of independence, 
and their hopes of getting free from his influence and reign, nor he could ignore their 
alliance to the Muslims — realizing all that, Caesar was aware of the progressive 
danger threatening his borders, especially Ash-Sham-fronts which were neighbouring 
Arab lands. So he concluded that demolition of the Muslims power had grown an 
urgent necessity. This decision of his should, in his opinion, be achieved before the 
Muslims become too powerful to conquer, and raise troubles and unrest in the 
adjacent Arab territories. 
To meet these exigencies, Caesar mustered a huge army of the Byzantines and pro-
Roman Ghassanide tribes to launch a decisive bloody battle against the Muslims.  
General News about the Byzantines and Ghassanide Preparations for War 
No sooner news about the Byzantine’s preparations for a decisive invasion against 
Muslims reached Madinah than fear spread among them. They started to envisage 
the Byzantine invasion in the least sound they could hear. This could be clearly 
worked out of what had happened to ‘Umar bin Al-Khattab one day. 
The Prophet [pbuh] had taken an oath to stay off his wives for a month in the ninth 
year of Al-Hijra. Therefore, he deserted them and kept off in a private place. At the 
beginning, the Companions of the Messenger of Allâh were puzzled and could not 
work out the reason for such behaviour. They thought the Prophet [pbuh] had 

273
divorced them and that was why he was grieved, disturbed and upset. In ‘Umar’s 
version of the very story he says: "I used to have a Helper friend who often informed 
me about what happened if I weren’t present, and in return I always informed him of 
what had taken place during his absence. They both lived in the high part of 
Madinah. Both of them used to call at the Prophet alternatively during that time of 
suspense. Then one day I heard my friend, knock at the door saying: "Open up! 
Open up!" I asked wondering, "What’s the matter? Has the Ghassanide come?" "No it 
is more serious