Here, the Prophet [pbuh] peeped from the dome of his house asking his people to go 
away, and making it clear that Allâh would take the charge of protecting him.[At-Tirmidhi 
2/130] 

126
The Prophet’s life was not the only target of the wicked schemes, but rather the lives 
and the whole entity of the Muslims. When the Madinese provided the Prophet 
[pbuh] and his Companions with safe refuge, the desert bedouins began to look at 
them all in the same perspective, and outlawed all the Muslims. 
At this precarious juncture with Quraish, intent on pursuing their aggressive and 
devilish plans, Allâh, the All-High, gave the Muslims the permission to take arms 
against the disbelievers: 
"Permission to fight is given to those (i.e. believers against those 
disbelievers), who are fighting them, (and) because they (believers) have 
been wronged, and surely Allâh is Able to give them (believers) victory." 
[Al-Qur'an 22:39] 
This verse was revealed in a larger context of Divine instructions to eradicate all 
aspects of falsehood, and hold in honour the symbols and rites of Allâh: 
"Those (Muslim rulers) who, if We give them power in the land, (they) order 
for Iqamat-as-Salât: [i.e. to perform Salât (prayer) — the five compulsory, 
congregational prayers (the males in Mosques)], to pay the Zakat 
(obligatory charity), and they enjoin Al-Ma‘ruf (i.e. Islamic Monotheism and 
all that Islam orders one to do), and forbid Al-Munkar (i.e. disbelief, 
polytheism and all that Islam has forbidden) [i.e. they make the Qur’ân as 
the Law of their country in all the spheres of life]." [Al-Qur'an 22:41]. 
Doubtlessly, the permission to fight was revealed in Madinah after emigration, not in 
Makkah, still the exact date where of is in doubt. 
The permission to fight was already there, but in the light of the status quo, it was 
wise for the Muslims to bring the commercial routes leading to Makkah under their 
control. To realize this strategic objective, the Prophet [pbuh] had to choose either of 
two options: 
a. Entering into non-aggression pacts with the tribes inhabiting either the areas 
adjacent to the routes or between these routes and Madinah. With respect to 
this course of action, the Prophet [pbuh] had already signed, together with 
the Jews and other neighbouring tribes, the aforementioned pact of 
cooperation and good neighbourliness.