the way to Tabuk, or as soon as they reached Tabuk, the Messenger of Allâh 
[pbuh] said: ‘Severe wind will blow tonight, so none of you should stand up. 
Whoever has a camel should tie it up.’ Later on when the strong wind blew, one of 
the men stood up and the wind carried him away to Tai’ Mountain. [ibid. Sahih Muslim 2/246] 
All the way long the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] was intent on the performance of the 
combined prayer of noon and the afternoon; and so did he with sunset and evening 
prayers. His prayers for both were either pre-time or post-time prayers. 
The Army of Islam at Tabuk 
Arriving at Tabuk and camping there, the Muslim army was ready to face the enemy. 
There, the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] delivered an eloquent speech that included the 
most inclusive words. In that speech he urged the Muslims to seek the welfare of this 
world and the world to come. He warned and cherished them and gave them good 
tidings. By doing that he cherished those who were broken in spirits, and blocked up 
the gap of shortage and mess they were suffering from due to lack of supplies, food 
and other substances. 
Upon learning of the Muslims’ march, the Byzantines and their allies were so terrified 
that none of them dared set out to fight. On the contrary they scattered inside their 
territory. It brought, in itself, a good credit to the Muslim forces. That had gained 
military reputation in the mid and remote lands of Arabian Peninsula. The great and 
serious political profits that the Muslim forces had obtained, were far better than the 
ones they could have acquired if the two armies had been engaged in military 
confrontation. 
The Head of Ailah, Yahna bin Rawbah came to the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh], made 
peace with him and paid him the tribute (Al-Jizya). Both of Jarba’ and Adhruh 

277
peoples paid him tribute, as well. So the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] gave each a 
guarantee letter, similar to Yahna’s, in which he says: 
"In the Name of Allâh, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful. 
This is a guarantee of protection from Allâh and Muhammad the Prophet, 
the Messenger of Allâh, to Yahna bin Rawbah and the people of Ailah; their 
ships, their caravans on land and sea shall have the custody of Allâh and the 
Prophet Muhammad, he and whosoever are with him of Ash-Sham people 
and those of the sea. Whosoever contravenes this treaty, his wealth shall 
not save him; it shall be the fair prize of him that takes it. Now it should not 
be lawful to hinder the men from any springs which they have been in the 
habit of frequenting, nor from any journeys they desire to make, whether by 
sea or by land." 
The Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] dispatched Khalid bin Al-Waleed at the head of four 
hundred and fifty horsemen to ‘Ukaidir Dumat Al-Jandal and said to him: "You will 
see him hunting oryxes." So when Khalid drew near his castle and was as far as an 
eye-sight range, he saw the oryxes coming out rubbing their horns against the castle 
gate. As it was a moony night Khalid could see Ukaidir come out to hunt them, so he 
captured him — though he was surrounded by his men — and brought him back to 
the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh], who spared his life and made peace with him for the 
payment of two thousand camels, eight hundred heads of cattle, four hundred 
armours and four hundred lances. He obliged him to recognize the duty of paying 
tribute and charged him with collecting it from Dumat, Tabuk, Ailah and Taima’. 
The tribes, who used to ally the Byzantines, became quite certain that their 
dependence oinn their former masters came to an end. Therefore they turned into 
being pro-Muslims. The Islamic state had therefore enlarged its borders to an extent 
that it, touched the Byzantines’ and their agents’ borders. So we see