ion led by ‘Abdur Rahman bin ‘Auf was despatched to the 
habitation of Bani Kalb in Doumat Al-Jandal in Sha‘ban 6 Hijri. Before setting 
out, the Prophet [pbuh] summoned ‘Abdur Rahman, and placed his hand on 
the latter’s hand invoking Allâh’s blessings and giving him commandments to 
act magnanimously during the war. He told him to marry the king’s daughter 
if they obeyed him. ‘Abdur Rahman stayed among those people for three 
days, invited them to Islam and they responded positively. He then did marry 
the king’s daughter Tamadur bint Al-Asbagh. 
2. In the same month and year, ‘Ali bin Abi Talib was despatched at the head of 
a platoon to the habitation of Bani Sa‘d bin Bakr in a place called Fadk. 
Prophet Muhammad [pbuh] had been reported that those had rallied ranks to 
support the Jews. The Muslim fighters used to march in the day and lurk at 
night. On their way, they captured an enemy scout who admitted being sent 
to Khaibar tribe, to offer them support in return for their dates. ‘Ali and his 
companions raided their encampment, captured five hundred camels and two 
thousand goats, but Banu Sa‘d, with their chieftain Wabr bin ‘Aleem had fled 
away. 
3. An expedition led by Abu Bakr As-Siddiq or Zaid bin Haritha was despatched 
to Wadi Al-Qura in Ramadan 6 Hijri after Fazara sept had made an attempt at 
the Prophet’s life. Following the morning prayer, the detachment was given 
orders to raid the enemy. Some of them were killed and others captured. 
Amongst the captives, were Umm Qirfa and her beautiful daughter, who was 
sent to Makkah as a ransom for the release of some Muslim prisoners there.[] 
Umm Qirfa’s attempts at the Prophet’s life recoiled on her, and the thirty 
horsemen she had gathered and sustained to implement her evil scheme 
were all killed. 
4. Anas bin Malik reported that some people belonging to tribe of ‘Uraina came 
to Allâh’s Messenger [pbuh] and made pretensions to Islam. They stayed in 
Madinah but found its climate uncongenial, so they were asked to pitch their 
tents in the pastures nearby. They did so and were all right. They then fell on 
the Prophet’s shepherd and killed him, turned apostates from Islam and drove 
off the camels. This news reached the Prophet [pbuh] , who sent a group of 
twenty Muslims led by Karz bin Jabir Al-Fihri on their track. They were 
brought and handed over to him. He had their hands and feet cut off, their 
eyes gouged out in recompense for their behaviour, and then they were 
thrown on the stony ground until they died. [Za'd Al-Ma'ad 2/122]  
Biographers also reported ‘Amr bin Omaiya Ad-Damari and Salamah bin Abi 
Salamah to have been sent on an errand to kill Abu Sufyan, the chief of 
Quraish, who had already sent a bedouin to kill the Prophet [pbuh]. The two-
men mission failed except for three polytheists killed on the way. It is 
noteworthy that all the foregone invasions did not imply real bitter fighting, 
they were rather skirmishes or punitive military manoeuvres carried out to 
deter some enemies still unsubdued. Deep meditation on the development of 
war circumstances reveal the continuous collap