ame under the 
hold of the Christians – the Muslims of that time – although Makkah was 
populated by polytheists. 
News of the Elephant Event reached the most distant corners of the then 
civilized world. Abyssinia (Ethiopia) maintained strong ties with the Romans, 
while the Persians on the other hand, were on the vigil with respect to any 
strategic changes that were looming on the socio-political horizon, and soon 
came to occupy Yemen. Incidentally, the Roman and Persian Empires stood 

35
for the powerful civilized world at that time. The Elephant Raid Event riveted 
the world’s attention to the sacredness of All? ’s House, and showed that this 
House had been chosen by All?  for its holiness. It followed then if any of its 
people claimed Prophethood, it would be congruous with the outcome of the 
Elephant Event, and would provide a justifiable explanation for the ulterior 
Divine Wisdom that lay behind backing polytheists against Christians in a 
manner that transcended the cause-and-effect formula. 
‘Abdul-Muttalib had ten sons, Al-Harith, Az-Zubair, Abu Talib, ‘Abdullah, 
Hamzah, Abu Lahab, Ghidaq, Maqwam, Safar and Al-‘Abbas. He also had six 
daughters, who were Umm Al-Hakim – the only white one, Barrah, ‘Atikah, 
Safiya, Arwa and Omaima. [Rahmat-ul-lil'alameen 2/56,66; Talqeeh Fuhoom 
Ahl Al-Athar, p8,9] 
3. ‘Abdullah: The father of Prophet Muhammad [pbuh]. His mother was 
Fatimah, daughter of ‘Amr bin ‘A’idh bin ‘Imran bin Makhzum bin Yaqdha bin 
Murra. ‘Abdullah was the smartest of ‘Abdul-Muttalib’s sons, the chastest and 
the most loved. He was also the son whom the divination arrows pointed at to 
be slaughtered as a sacrifice to Al-Ka‘bah. When ‘Abdul-Muttalib had ten sons 
and they reached maturity, he divulged to them his secret vow in which they 
silently and obediently acquiesced. Their names were written on divination 
arrows and given to the guardian of their most beloved goddess, Hubal. The 
arrows were shuffled and drawn. An arrow showed that it was ‘Abdullah to be 
sacrificed. ‘Abdul-Muttalib then took the boy to Al-Ka‘bah with a razor to 
slaughter the boy. Quraish, his uncles from Makhzum tribe and his brother 
Abu Talib, however, tried to dissuade him from consummating his purpose. 
He then sought their advice as regards his vow. They suggested that he 
summon a she-diviner to judge whereabout. She ordered that the divination 
arrows should be drawn with respect to ‘Abdullah as well as ten camels. She 
added that drawing the lots should be repeated with ten more camels every 
time the arrow showed ‘Abdullah. The operation was thus repeated until the 
number of the camels amounted to one hundred. At this point the arrow 
showed the camels, consequently they were all slaughtered (to the 
satisfaction of Hubal) instead of his son. The slaughtered camels were left for 
anyone to eat from, human or animal.  
This incident produced a change in the amount of blood-money usually 
accepted in Arabia. It had been ten camels, but after this event it was 
increased to a hundred. Islam, later on, approved of this. Another thing 
closely relevant to the above issue goes to the effect that the Prophet [pbuh] 
once said: 
"I am the offspring of the slaughtered two," meaning Ishmael and ‘Abdullah. 
[Ibn Hisham 1/151-155; Rahmat-ul-lil'alameen 2/89,90] 
‘Abdul-Muttalib chose Amina, daughter of Wahab bin ‘Abd Munaf bin Zahra bin 
Kilab, as a wife for his son, ‘Abdullah. She thus, in the light of this ancestral 
lineage, stood eminent in respect of nobility of position and descent. Her 
father was the chief of Bani Zahra to whom great honour was attributed. They 
were married in Makkah, and soon after ‘Abdullah was sent by his father to 
buy dates in Madinah where he died. In another version, ‘Abdullah went to 
Syria on a trade journey and died in Madinah on his way back. He was buried 

36
in the house of An-Nabigha Al-Ju‘di. He was twenty-five years old when he 
died. Most historians state that his death was two months before the birth of 
Muhammad [pbuh] . Some others said that his death was two months after 
the Prophet’s birth. When Amina was informed of her husband’s death, she 
celebrated his memory in a most heart-touching elegy. [Ibn Hisham 1/156-
158; Fiqh As-Seerah p