was white. [Muslim 1/92]  
Back to His Passionate Mother 
After this event, Haleemah was worried about the boy and returned him to his 
mother with whom he stayed until he was six. [Talqeeh Furoom Ahl-al-Athar p.7; Ibn 
Hisham 1/168] 
In respect of the memory of her late husband, Amina decided to visit his grave in 
Yathrib (Madinah). She set out to cover a journey of 500 kilometers with her orphan 
boy, woman servant Umm Ayman and her father-in-law ‘Abdul-Muttalib. She spent a 
month there and then took her way back to Makkah. On the way, she had a severe 
illness and died in Abwa on the road between Makkah and Madinah. [Ibn Hisham 
1/168; Talqeeh Fuhroom Ahl-al-Athar p.7]  
To His Compassionate Grandfather 
‘Abdul-Muttalib brought the boy to Makkah. He had warm passions towards the boy, 
his orphan grandson, whose recent disaster (his mother’s death) added more to the 
pains of the past. ‘Abdul-Muttalib was more passionate with his grandson than with 
his own children. He never left the boy a prey to loneliness, but always preferred him 
to his own kids. Ibn Hisham reported: A mattress was put in the shade of Al-Ka‘bah 
for ‘Abdul-Muttalib. His children used to sit around that mattress in honour to their 
father, but Muhammad [pbuh] used to sit on it. His uncles would take him back, but 
if ‘Abdul-Muttalib was present, he would say: "Leave my grandson. I swear by All?
 
that this boy will hold a significant position." He used to seat the boy on his 
mattress, pat his back and was always pleased with what the boy did. [Ibn Hisham 
1/168] 
When Muhammad [pbuh] was eight years, two months and ten days old, his 
grandfather ‘Abdul-Muttalib passed away in Makkah. The charge of the Prophet 
[pbuh] was now passed on to his uncle Abu Talib, who was the brother of the 
Prophet’s father. 
Abu Talib took the charge of his nephew in the best way. He put him with his 
children and preferred him to them. He singled the boy out with great respect and 
high esteem. Abu Talib remained for forty years cherishing his nephew and 
extending all possible protection and support to him. His relations with the others 
were determined in the light of the treatment they showed to the Prophet [pbuh]. 
Ibn ‘Asakir reported on the authority of Jalhamah bin ‘Arfuta who said: "I came to 
Makkah when it was a rainless year, so Quraish said ‘O Abu Talib, the valley has 
become leafless and the children hungry, let us go and pray for rain-fall.’ Abu Talib 
went to Al-Ka‘bah with a young boy who was as beautiful as the sun, and a black 
cloud was over his head. Abu Talib and the boy stood by the wall of Al-Ka‘bah and 
prayed for rain. Immediately clouds from all directions gathered and rain fell heavily 

40
and caused the flow of springs and growth of plants in the