and honourable purposes. 
However, the treatment of the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] to his wives was of 
honourable, noble, and superb nature. His wives were on tops in respect of honour, 
satisfaction, patience, modesty, and service (that is to say the performance of 
housework and marriage duties). Although the Messenger’s house-life was hard and 
unbearable, none of his wives complained. Anas said about the Prophet’s life: 
"According to my knowledge, the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] has never tasted a thin 
flattened loaf in all his lifetime, nor has he ever seen with his own eyes roasted 
mutton." [Sahih Al-Bukhari 2/956] 
‘Aishah said: "Over two months have elapsed — during which we have seen three 
crescents — and yet no fire has been kindled in the houses of the Messenger of Allâh 
[pbuh] (i.e. they did not cook food)." "What did you eat to sustain yourselves?" 
‘Urwah asked. She said "The two blacks: dates and water" [ibid 2/956]. Lots of 
information about the hard life of the Prophet [pbuh] were told. 
In spite of these hardships, straits and adversity of life in the house of the Prophet 
[pbuh], none of his wives uttered a word of complaint worthy of reproach — but 
once. This exception was required by human instinctive inclinations. However, it was 

316
not so important and consequently it did not require the decree of a legislative rule. 
Allâh has given them an opportunity to choose between two things, as clearly stated 
in the following verses: 
"O Prophet (Muhammad [pbuh])! Say to your wives: ‘If you desire the life of 
this world, and its glitter, — then come! I will make a provision for you and 
set you free in a handsome manner (divorce). But if you desire Allâh and His 
Messenger, and the Home of the Hereafter, then verily, Allâh has prepared 
for Al-Muhsinat (good doers) amongst you an enormous reward.’" [Al-Qur'an 
33:28,29] 
They were so noble and honest that none of them preferred ‘the life of this world and 
its glitter’ to the abode in the Hereafter. 
Although they were many in number, nothing of the dispute occurrences that 
normally happen among co-wives, took place in their houses. Very few cases could 
be the only exception; but they were quite normal. Allâh reproached them for that, 
so they ceased to do such a thing. This incident is mentioned in At-Tahreem 
Chapter:  
"O Prophet! Why do you ban (for yourself) that which Allâh has made lawful 
to you …" [Al-Qur'an 66:1] (to the end of the fifth verse). 
Discussing polygamy — in my opinion — is not a necessity; since a person who is 
familiar with the Europeans, and indecent practices, sufferings, wickedness, their 
sorrows and distresses, the horrible crimes they commit in this respect as well as the 
trials, the disasters that they are involved in, and which emanate directly from their 
disregard of the principle of polygamy form a good reason (to justify the soundness 
of polygamy). The distorted picture of life in Europe with the ill-practices featuring it, 
could truthfully justify the existence and practice of polyga