rship in Pan-Arabia 
We have previously mentioned the Qahtanide and ‘Adnanide emigrations, and 
division of Arabia between these two tribes. Those tribes dwelling near Heerah were 
subordinate to the Arabian king of Heerah, while those dwelling in the Syrian semi-
desert were under domain of the Arabian Ghassanide king, a sort of dependency that 
was in reality formal rather than actual. However, those living in the hinder deserts 
enjoyed full autonomy. 
These tribes in fact had heads chosen by the whole tribe which was a demi-
government based on tribal solidarity and collective interests in defence of land and 
property. 
Heads of tribes enjoyed dictatorial privileges similar to those of kings, and were 
rendered full obedience and subordination in both war and peace. Rivalry among 
cousins for rulership, however, often drove them to outdo one another in 
entertaining guests, affecting generosity, wisdom and chivalry for the sole purpose of 
outranking their rivals, and gaining fame among people especially poets who were 
the official spokesmen at the time. 
Heads of tribes and masters had special claims to spoils of war such as the quarter of 
the spoils, whatever he chose for himself, or found on his way back or even the 
remaining indivisible spoils.  
The Political Situation 
The three Arab regions adjacent to foreigners suffered great weakness and 
inferiority. The people there were either masters or slaves, rulers or subordinates. 
Masters, especially the foreigners, had claim to every advantage; slaves had nothing 
but responsibilities to shoulder. In other words, arbitrary autocratic rulership brought 
about encroachment on the rights of subordinates, ignorance, oppression, iniquity, 
injustice and hardship, and turning them into people groping in darkness and 
ignorance, viz., fertile land which rendered its fruits to the rulers and men of power 
to extravagantly dissipate on their pleasures and enjoyments, whims and desires, 
tyranny and aggression. The tribes living near these regions were fluctuating 

21
between Syria and Iraq, whereas those living inside Arabia were disunited and 
governed by tribal conflicts and racial and religious disputes. 
They had neither a king to sustain their independence nor a supporter to seek advice 
from, or depend upon, in hardships. 
The rulers of Hijaz, however, were greatly esteemed and respected by the Arabs, 
and were considered as rulers and servants of the religious centre. Rulership of Hijaz 
was, in fact, a mixture of secular and official precedence as well as religious 
leadership. They ruled among the Arabs in the name of religious leadership and 
always monopolized the custodianship of the Holy Sanctuary and its neighbourhood. 
They looked after the interests of Al-Ka‘bah visitors and were in charge of putting 
Abraham’s code into effect. They even had such offices and departments like those 
of the parliaments of today. However, they were too weak to carry the heavy 
burden, as this evident