erat Al-Arab p.260]  
Al-Fudoul Confederacy 
At the conclusion of these wars, when peace was restored, people felt the need for 
forming confederacy at Makkah for suppressing violence and injustice, and 
vindicating the rights of the weak and the destitute. Representatives of Banu 
Hashim, Banu Al-Muttalib, Asad bin ‘Abd Al-‘Uzza, Zahrah bin Kilab and Taim bin 
Murra were called to meet in the habitation of an honourable elderly man called 
‘Abdullah bin Jada‘an At-Taimy to enter into a confederacy that would provide for the 
above-mentioned items. The Messenger of All?  [pbuh] shortly after he had been 
honoured with the ministry of Prophethood, witnessed this league and commented 
on it, with very positive words: "I witnessed a confederacy in the house of ‘Abdullah 
bin Jada‘an. It was more appealing to me than herds of cattle. Even now in the 
period of Islam I would respond positively to attending such a meeting if I were 
invited." [Ibn Hisham 1/113,135] 
In fact, the spirit of this confederacy and the course of deliberations therein marked 
a complete departure from the pre-Islamic tribal-pride. The story that led to its 

41
convention says that a man from Zubaid clan came as a merchant to Makkah where 
he sold some commodities to Al-‘As bin Wail As-Sahmy. The latter by hook or by 
crook tried to evade paying for the goods. The salesman sought help from the 
different clans in Quraish but they paid no heed to his earnest pleas. He then 
resorted to a mountain top and began, at the top of his voice, to recite verses of 
complaint giving account of the injustices he sustained. Az-Zubair bin ‘Abdul-Muttalib 
heard of him and made inquiries into the matter. Consequently, the parties to the 
aforesaid confederacy convened their meeting and managed to force Az-Zubaidy’s 
money out of Al-‘As bin Wa’il. [Mukhtasar Seerat-ur-Rasool, p.30,31]  
Muhammad’s Early Job 
Muhammad [pbuh], had no particular job at his early youth, but it was reported that 
he worked as a shepherd for Bani Sa‘d and in Makkah. At the age of 25, he went to 
Syria as a merchant for Khadijah [R]. Ibn Ishaq reported that Khadijah, daughter of 
Khwailid was a business-woman of great honour and fortune. She used to employ 
men to do her business for a certain percentage of the profits. Quraish people were 
mostly tradespeople, so when Khadijah was informed of Muhammad [pbuh], his 
truthful words, great honesty and kind manners, she sent for him. She offered him 
money to go to Syria and do her business, and she would give him a higher rate 
t