ps:  
1. Azd: Who, under the leadership of ‘Imran bin ‘Amr Muzaiqb?#146;, wandered 
in Yemen, sent pioneers and finally headed northwards. Details of their 
emigration can be summed up as follows:   
Tha‘labah bin ‘Amr left his tribe Al-Azd for Hijaz and dwelt between 
Tha‘labiyah and Dhi Qar. When he gained strength, he headed for Madinah 
where he stayed. Of his seed are Aws and Khazraj, sons of Haritha bin 
Tha‘labah.   
Haritha bin ‘Amr, known as Khuza‘a, wandered with his folks in Hijaz until 
they came to Mar Az-Zahran. Later, they conquered the Haram, and settled in 
Makkah after having driven away its people, the tribe of Jurhum.  
‘Imran bin ‘Amr and his folks went to ‘Oman where they established the tribe 
of Azd whose children inhabited Tihama and were known as Azd-of-Shanu’a.  
Jafna bin ‘Amr and his family, headed for Syria where he settled and initiated 
the kingdom of Ghassan who was so named after a spring of water, in Hijaz, 
where they stopped on their way to Syria.  
2. Lakhm and Judham: Of whom was Nasr bin Rabi‘a, father of Manadhira, 
Kings of Heerah. 
3. Banu Tai’: Who also emigrated northwards to settle by the so- called Aja and 
Salma Mountains which were consequently named as Tai’ Mountains. 
4. Kinda: Who dwelt in Bahrain but were expelled to Hadramout and Najd 
where they instituted a powerful government but not for long , for the whole 
tribe soon faded away.  
Another tribe of Himyar, known as Quda‘a, also left Yemen and dwelt in Samawa 
semi-desert on the borders of Iraq. 
The Arabized Arabs go back in ancestry to their great grandfather Abraham [AWS] 
from a town called "Ar" near Kufa on the west bank of the Euphrates in Iraq. 
Excavations brought to light great details of the town, Abraham’s family, and the 
prevalent religions and social circumstances. [Tafheem-ul-Qur'an, 1/553] 
It is known that Abraham [AWS] left Ar for Harran and then for Palestine, which he 
made headquarters for his Message. He wandered all over the area. When he went 

10
to Egypt, the Pharaoh tried to do evil to his wife Sarah, but All?  saved her and the 
Pharaoh’s wicked scheme recoiled on him. He thus came to realize her strong 
attachment to All? , and, in acknowledgment of her grace, the Pharaoh rendered his 
daughter Hagar at Sarah’s service, but Sarah gave Hagar to Abraham as a wife. 
[Bukhari 1/474] 
Abraham returned to Palestine where Hagar gave birth to Ishmael. Sarah became so 
jealous of Hagar that she forced Abraham to send Hagar and her baby away to a 
plantless valley on a small hill in Hijaz, by the Sacred House, exposed to the wearing 
of floods coming right and left. He chose for them a place under a lofty tree above 
Zamzam near the upper side of the Mosque in Makkah where neither people nor 
water was available, and went back to Palestine leaving with his wife and baby a 
leather case with some dates and a pot of water. Not before long, they ran out of 
both food and water, but thanks to All? ’s favour water gushed forth to sustain them 
for s