Gabriel [AWS], on the very day the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] came back 
to Madinah after the previous battle, and while he was washing in Umm Salama’s 
house, visited him asking that he should unsheathe his sword and head for the 
habitation of the seditious Banu Quraiza and fight them. Gabriel noted that he with a 
procession of angels would go ahead to shake their forts and cast fear in their 
hearts. 
The Messenger of Allâh [pbuh], immediately summoned the prayer caller and 
ordered him to announce fresh hostilities against Banu Quraiza, institued Ibn Umm 
Maktum as a ruler of Madinah, and entrusted the banner of war to ‘Ali bin Abi Talib 
who marched towards the appointed target and came close enough to hear the Jews 
abusing the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh], who on his part set out at the head of three 
thousand infantry men and thirty horsemen of Ansar (Helpers) and Muhajireen 
(Emigrants). On their way to encounter the enemy, the afternoon prayer was due. 
Some Muslims refused to observe it until they had defeated the enemy, while others 
offered it in its proper time, as usual. The Prophet [pbuh] objected to neither. When 
they reached the habitations of Banu Quraiza, they laid tight siege to their forts. 
Seeing this terrible situation they were in, the chief of the Jews Ka‘b bin Asad offered 
them three alternatives: to embrace Islam, and consequently their life, wealth, 
women and children would be in full security, and reminded them that such 
behaviour would not be incongruous with what they had read in their books about 
the veracity of Muhammad’s Prophethood; to kill their children and women and then 
challenge the Prophet [pbuh] and his followers to the sword to either exterminate 
the Muslims or be exterminated, or as a third possibility to take Muhammad [pbuh] 
and his people by surprise on Saturday — a day mutually understood to witness no 
fighting. 
None of those alternatives appealed them, so their chief, angrily and indignantly, 
turned to them saying: "You have never been decisive in decision-making since you 
were born" The gloomy future already visible, they made contacts with some 
Muslims, who had maintained good relation with them, in order to learn about their 
fate in the light of the current circumstances. They requested that Abu Lubaba be 
despatched to them for advice. On his arrival, the men began to implore, women and 
children to cry desperately. In answer to their demand for advice he pointed to his 
throat saying it was homicide awaiting them. He then immediately realized that he 
had betrayed the Prophet’s trust, so he headed directly for the mosque in Madinah 
and tied himself to a wooden tall pole swearing that no one would untie him save the 
Messenger of Allâh [pbuh], and added that he would never enter the habitation of 
Banu Quraiza in recompense for the deadly mistake he made. When the Messenger 
[pbuh] was informed