ople, Duraid consequently said: "Today is a day that I 
have not missed but surely I will not be tempted to witness." 
Reconnoitering the Weapons of the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] 
The spies that Malik had already dispatched to spy Muslim forces, returned with their 
limbs cut off. "Woe unto you! What happened to you?" Said Malik. They said: "We 
have seen distinguished people on spotted horsebacks. What you see, would not 
have happened if we had been firmly together." 
Reconnoitering the Enemy’s Weapons 
News about the enemy’s marching were conveyed to the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh], 
so he sent out Al-Aslami with orders to mix with people, stay with them so that he 
would be able to know their news and to convey it to the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] 
when he turns back. That was exactly what he managed to do. 
The Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] leaves Makkah for Hunain 
On Shawwal, the nineteenth, the captive day, the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] left 
Makkah accompanied by twelve thousand Muslims. Ten thousand of those had 
previously shared in Makkah Conquest. A great number of the other two thousand, 
who were Makkans, had recently embraced Islam. That march was on the nineteenth 
day of his conquest to Makkah. He borrowed a hundred armours with their 

260
equipment from Safwan bin Omaiyah. He appointed ‘Itab bin Usaid as a governor 
over Makkah. When it was evening time, a horseman came to the Messenger of Allâh 
[pbuh] and said: "I have climbed up so and so mountains and came across Hawazin 
with their riding camels, livestock and sheep. Hawazin wholly were gathered together 
there." The Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] smiled then and said: "They will all be 
Muslims’ spoils tomorrow, if Allâh will." That night Anas bin Abi Murthid Al-Ghanawi 
volunteered to guard. [Abu Da'ud] 
On their way to Hunain they saw a great green Nabk plant, that was called Dhat-
Anwat (the one with suspenders). That was because the Arabs used to hang their 
weapons on it, slay beasts under it and keep to it. So some of army members asked 
the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] to make them a Nabk with suspenders as the one 
they had. "Allâh is the Greatest of all!" He said, "I swear by the One in Whose Hand 
is Muhammad’s soul, that you have just said what the people of Moses said to him. 
They said ‘Make us a god as the one they have.’ Surely you are ignorant people. 
These are Sunnah, but you will follow and comply with the modes of life of those who 
preceded you." [At-Tirmidhi] 
Seeing how great in number the army was, some of them said: "We shall not be 
defeated." Their statement sounded hard upon the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh].  
The Islamic Army stunned the Archers and the Attackers 
On Wednesday night the tenth of Shawwal, the Muslim army arrived at Hunain. Malik 
bin ‘Awf, who had previously entered the valley by night, gave orders to his army to 
hide inside the valley and lurk for the Muslims on roads, entrances, narrow hiding 
places. His orders to his men were to hurl stones at Muslims whenever they caught 
sight of them and then to make a one-man attack against them. 
At early dawn the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] started mobilizing his army and 
distributing posts and flags to people. In the dark and just before dawn the Muslims 
moved towards Hunain Valley. They started descending into it unaware of the 
presence of an enemy lurking for them inside the valley. So at the moment they 
were camping, arrows began showering intensively at them, whereas the enemy’s 
battalions started a fierce attack against the Muslims, who had to retreat in disorder 
and utter confusion. It was such a shatteringly defeat that Abu Sufyan bin Harb, who 
had recently embraced Islam, said that their retreat would not stop till they got to 
the Red Sea. Jablah or Kildah bin Al-Junaid commented on that by saying: "Surely 
magic has grown inactive today." 
The Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] turned to the right and said: "Come on, people! I am 
the Messenger of Allâh. I am Muhammad, the son of Abdullah." Those who stoodfast 
by him were only few Emigrants and some of his kinsmen. The matchless bravery of 
the Prophet [R] was then brought to light. He went on and on in his attempts to 
make his mule standfast in the face of the disbelievers while saying loudly: 
"Truly saying, I am the Prophet 
I am the (grand) son of Abdul Muttalib." 

261
However, Abu Sufyan, who was then holding the rein of the Prophet’s mule, and Al-
‘Abbas, who was holding its stirrup; were endeavouring to make it halt. The 
Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] d