A Cooperation and Non-Aggression Pact with the Jews
Soon after emigrating to Madinah and making sure that the pillars of the new Islamic 
community were well established on strong bases of administrative, political and 
ideological unity, the Prophet [pbuh] commenced to establish regular and clearly-
defined relations with non-Muslims. All of these efforts were exerted solely to provide 
peace, security, and prosperity to all mankind at large, and to bring about a spirit of 
rapport and harmony within his region, in particular. 
Geographically, the closest people to Madinah were the Jews. Whilst harbouring evil 
intentions, and nursing bitter grudge, they showed not the least resistance nor the 
slightest animosity. The Prophet decided to ratify a treaty with them with clauses 
that provided full freedom in faith and wealth. He had no intention whatsoever of 
following severe policies involving banishment, seizure of wealth and land or 
hostility. 
The treaty came within the context of another one of a larger framework relating to 
inter-Muslim relationships. 
The most important provisions of the treaty are the following: 
1. The Jews of Bani ‘Awf are one community with the believers. The Jews will 
profess their religion, and the Muslims theirs. 
2. The Jews shall be responsible for their expenditure, and the Muslims for 
theirs. 
3. If attacked by a third party, each shall come to the assistance of the other. 
4. Each party shall hold counsel with the other. Mutual relation shall be founded 
on righteousness; sin is totally excluded. 
5. Neither shall commit sins to the prejudice of the other. 
6. The wronged party shall be aided. 
7. The Jews shall contribute to the cost of war so long as they are fighting 
alongside the believers. 
8. Madinah shall remain sacred and inviolable for all that join this treaty. 
9. Should any disagreement arise between the signatories to this treaty, then 
Allâh, the All-High and His Messenger shall settle the dispute. 
10. 
The signatories to this treaty shall boycott Quraish commercially; they 
shall also abstain from extending any support to them. 
11. 
Each shall contribute to defending Madinah, in case of a foreign attack, 
in its respective area. 
12