eople Who lagged Behind 
Due to its particular circumstances, this invasion was a peculiar severe trial provided 
by Allâh only to try the believers’Faith and sort them out of others. This is Allâh’s 
permanent Will in such circumstances. In this respect He says: 
"Allâh will not leave the believers in the state in which you are now, until He 
distinguishes the wicked from the good." [Al-Qur'an 3:179] 
Lagging and hanging back from full participation in that invasion amounted to the 
degree of hypocrisy. Whenever the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] was informed of a 
man’s lingering, he would say: "Leave him alone! If Allâh knows him to be good He 
will enable him to follow you; but if he were not so, Allâh would relieve us of him." 
Nobody stayed behind except those who were either hindered by a serious excuse or 
the hypocrites who told lies to Allâh and His Messenger. 
Some of those hypocrites’ lingering was due to an excuse based on forgery and 
delusion. Some others tarried but didn’t ask for an instant permission. But there 
were three believers who unjustifiably lingered. They were the ones whom Allâh tried 
their Faith, but later on He turned to them in mercy and accepted their repentance. 
As soon as the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] had entered Madinah, he prayed two Rak‘a 
then he sat to receive his people. The hypocrites who were over eighty men [Fath Al-
Bari 8/119] came and offered various kinds of excuses and started swearing. The 
Prophet acknowledged their excuses and invoked Allâh’s forgiveness for them but he 
entrusted their inner thoughts and Faith to Allâh. 

279
As for the three faithful believers — Ka‘b bin Malik, Murara bin Ar-Rabi‘, and Hilal bin 
Omaiyah — who favoured telling the truth, the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] bade his 
Companions not to talk to them. 
Consequently they were subject to a severe boycott and were excluded from the life 
of the community. Everybody turned them their back. So they felt as if the whole 
land had become constrained to them in spite of its spaciousness and they felt 
awkward and uneasy. The hard times they lived and which lasted for over forty days 
were towered by an order to them to forsake their wives. After fifty days’ boycott 
Allâh turned to them and revealed that in Qur’ân: 
"And (He did forgive also) the three (whom the Prophet Õáì Çááå Úáíå æ 
Óáã) left (i.e. he did not give his judgement in their case, and their case was 
suspended for Allâh’s Decision) till for them the earth, vast as it is, was 
straitened and their ownselves were straitened to them, and they perceived 
that there is no fleeing from Allâh, and no refuge but with Him. Then, He 
accepted their repentance, that they might repent (unto Him). Verily, Allâh 
is the One Who accepts repentance, Most Merciful." [Al-Qur'an 9:118] 
Allâh’s turning to them was a great joy for both Muslims and the three concerned. 
The joy of the stayers behind was unaccountable in aim and degree. It was the 
happiest day in their lives. The good tiding cherished them and filled their hearts 
with delight. As for those who lingered due to disability or sickness or any other 
serious excuse, Allâh, the Exalted said about them: 
"There is no blame on those who are weak or ill or who find no resources to 
spend [in holy warfare (Jihad)], if they are sincere (in duty) to Allâh and His 
Messenger." [Al-Qur'an 9:91] 
When he approached Madinah, the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] said: 
"Inside Madinah, there are certain men, who though being left back due to 
serious excuses, they have, all the time, been with you. Lingerers as they 
are, they have been while you were passing valleys or walking along roads." 
"Do you mean that they have done that while they are still in Madinah?" 
They wondered. "