e most eloquent and most concise justification of this ‘Journey’ is expressed in 
Allâh’s Words: 
"... in order that We might show him (Muhammad) of Our Ayât (proofs, 
evidences, signs, etc.)" [Al-Qur'an 17:1]. 
The Divine rules as regards the Prophets goes as follows: 
"Thus did We show Abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the earth that 
he be one of those who have Faith with certainty." [Al-Qur'an 6:75] 
To Moses, his Lord said: 
"That We may show you (some) of Our Greater Signs." [Al-Qur'an 20:23] 
In order that: 
"He be of those who have Faith with certainty." 
The Prophets, after seeing Allâh’s Signs, will establish their Faith on solid certainty 
too immune to be parted with. They are in fact eligible for this Divine privilege 

92
because they are the ones who will bear burdens too heavy for other ordinary people 
to carry, and in the process of their mission, they will regard all worldly ordeals and 
agonies too small to care about. 
There are simple facts that emanate from this blessed Journey, and flow along into 
the flowery garden of the Prophetic biography; peace and blessings of Allâh be upon 
its author, Muhammad. The story of ‘the Night Journey’ as we see in the Noble 
Qur’ân is epitomised in the first verse of the Sûrah Isra’(Chapter 17 — The Journey 
by Night) then there is a quick shift to uncover the shameful deeds and crimes of the 
Jews, followed by an admonition saying that the Qur’ân guides to that which is most 
just and right. This arrangement is not in fact a mere coincidence. Jerusalem was the 
first scene of the Night Journey, and here lies the message directed to the Jews and 
which explicitly suggested that they would be discharged of the office of leadership 
of mankind due to the crimes they had perpetrated and which no longer justified 
their occupation of that office. The message suggested explicitly that the office of 
leadership would be reinstituted by the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] to hold in his hand 
both headquarters of the Abrahamic Faith, the Holy Sanctuary in Makkah and the 
Farthest Mosque in Jerusalem. It was high time for the spiritual authority to be 
transferred from a nation whose history got pregnant with treachery, covenant-
breaching and aggression to another nation blessed with piety, and dutifulness to 
Allâh, with a Messenger who enjoys the privilege of the Qur’ânic Revelation, which 
leads to that which is best and right. 
There, however, remains a crucial question waiting to be answered: How could this 
foreseen transition of authority be effected while the champion himself (Muhammad) 
was left deserted and forsaken stumbling in the hillocks of Makkah? This question per 
se uncovered the secrets of another issue which referred to a phase of the Islamic 
Call and the appearance of another role it was about to take up, different in its 
course and noble in its approaches. The forerunners of that new task took the shape 
of Qur’ânic verses smacking of direct and unequivocal warning accompanied by a 
severe ultimatum directed to the polytheists and their agents: 
"And when We decide to destroy a town (population), We (first) send a 
definite order (to obey Allâh and be righteous) to those among them [ or We 
(first) increase in number those of its population] who are given the good 
things of this life. Then, they transgress therein, and thus the word (of 
torment) is justified against it (them). Then We destroy it with complete 
destruction. And how many generations (past nations) have We destroyed 
after Noah! And Sufficient is your Lord as an All-Knower and All-Beholder of 
the sins of His slaves." [Al-Qur'an 17:16, 17] 
Together with these verses, there were others revealed to show the Muslims the 
rules and items of the civilization upon which they could erect their Muslim 
community, and foreshadowing their ownership of a piece of land, exercising full 
freedom over it and establishing a coherent society around whose axis the whole 
humanity would rotate. Those verses in reality implied better prospects for the 
Prophet [pbuh] comprising a secure shelter to settle in, and headquarters safe 
enough to empower and embolden him to communicate his Message to all the world 
at large; that was in fact the inner secret of that blessed journey. For this very 
wisdom and the like we deem it appropriate to suggest that ‘the Night Journey