towards 
Khaibar; of which we mention the following: 
1. It has been narrated on the authority of Salamah bin Al-Akwa‘, who said: We 
marched upon Khaibar with the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh]. We journeyed 
during the night. One of the men said to my brother ‘Amir: Won’t you recite 
to us some of your verses, ‘Amir? So he began to chant his verses to urge the 
camels, reciting:  
             O Allâh, if You had not guided us, 
               We would have neither been guided rightly nor practised charity, nor offered prayers. 
               We wish to lay down our lives for You; so forgive You our lapses, 
               And keep us steadfast when we encounter (our enemies). 
              Bestow upon us peace and tranquility, 
              Behold, when with a cry they called upon us to help 
2. The Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] said: "Who is this driver (of the camels)?" 
They said: "It is ‘Amir." He said: "Allâh will show mercy to him." A man said: 
"Martyrdom is reserved for him; O Messenger of Allâh, would that you had 
allowed us to benefit ourselves from his life."[Sahih Al-Bukhari 2/603; Sahih Muslim 
2/115] The Prophet’s Companions had already known that he would never 
invoke Allâh’s mercy upon a close Companion but to single him out for 
martyrdom.[Sahih Muslim 2/115] 
3. On their way down a valley, the Muslims began to entertain Allâh’s 
Greatness: shouting at the top of their voices: "Allâh is Great, Allâh is Great, 
there is no god but Allâh." The Prophet [pbuh] asked them to lower down 
their voices saying: "The One you are invoking is neither absent nor deaf; He 
is close to you, All-hearing.[Sahih Al-Bukhari 2/605]" 
4. In a spot called As-Sahba’, not far from Khaibar, the Prophet [pbuh] 
observed the afternoon prayer, then he called his Companions to have 
whatever food provisions they had. What they brought was too scanty to 
satisfy them all. The Prophet took it by his hand and it immediately grew in 
quantity, so they all ate to their fill. Shortly afterward, he and the others, 
rinsed their mouths and performed the evening prayer without ablution [Sahih 
Al-Bukhari 2/603]; he did the same for the night prayer [Maghazi Al-Waqidi 
p.112].  

235
The following morning, at sunrise, the Muslims encountered the Jews when they had 
come out about their jobs with their axes, spades and strings driving their cattle 
along. They began to shout in surprise: "Muhammad has come along with his force!" 
The Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] said: "Allâh is Great, Khaibar shall face destruction. 
Behold! When we descend in the city centre, it will be a bad day for those who have 
been warned (but have not taken heed). [Sahih Al-Bukhari 2/603, 604]" 
For encampment, the Prophet [pbuh] had chosen a certain plot of land he deemed 
suitable to serve as the headquarters of his army. However, a veteran fighter of his 
called Hubab bin Al-Mundhir suggested that they, under the exigencies of war 
requirements and for the sake of providing maximum logistic facilities, shift to 
another place. On approaching the vicinity of Khaibar, the Prophet ordered his troops 
to halt, and began to invoke his Lord saying: "O Allâh! Lord of the seven heavens 
and what they harbour beneath, Lord of the seven earths and what lies in their 
wombs, Lord of devils and whomsoever they have led astray; we beseech You to 
grant us the good of this village (Khaibar), the good of its inhabitants and the good 
that lies in it. We seek refuge with You from the evil of this village, the evil of its 
inhabitants, and the evil that lies in it." Then he ordered, "Now march (towards the 
village) in the Name of Allâh." [Ibn Hisham 2/329] 
"The banner", the Prophet [pbuh] declared "would be entrusted to a man who loves 
Allâh and His Messenger and they (Allâh and His Messenger) love him." All the 
Muslims came forward in the following morning hoping to be granted the honour of 
carrying the banner. The Prophet [pbuh] called for ‘Ali bin Abi Talib whose eyes used 
to hurt, and handed it to him. ‘Ali, on his part, pledged he would fight the enemies 
until they embraced Islam. The Prophet [pbuh] answered him saying: "Take things 
easy and invite them to accept Islam and brief them on their duties towards Allâh. I 
swear by Allâh that if only one should be guided through your example, that would 
surely outweigh the best of our camels." [Sahih Al-Bukhari 2/505, 60