[Bukhari 1/544] 
The Conversion of Hamzah bin ‘Abdul-Muttalib 
In a gloomy atmosphere infested with dark clouds of iniquity and tyranny, there 
shone on the horizon a promising light for the oppressed, i.e. the conversion of 
Hamzah bin ‘Abdul-Muttalib in Dhul Hijjah, the sixth year of Prophethood. It is 
recorded that the Prophet [pbuh] was one day seated on the hillock of Safa when 

69
Abu Jahl happened to pass by and accused the religion preached by him. Muhammad 
[pbuh] , however, kept silent and did not utter a single word. Abu Jahl went on 
unchecked, took a stone and cracked the Prophet’s head which began to bleed. The 
aggressor then went to join the Quraishites in their assembly place. It so happened 
that shortly after that, Hamzah, while returning from a hunting expedition, passed by 
the same way, his bow hanging by his shoulder. A slave-girl belonging to ‘Abdullah 
bin Jada‘an, who had noted the impertinence of Abu Jahl, told him the whole story of 
the attack on the Prophet [pbuh] . On hearing that, Hamzah was deeply offended 
and hurried to Al-Ka‘bah and there, in the courtyard of the Holy Sanctuary, found 
Abu Jahl sitting with a company of Quraishites. Hamzah rushed upon him and struck 
his bow upon his head violently and said: "Ah! You have been abusing Muhammad 
[pbuh] ; I too follow his religion and profess what he preaches." The men of Bani 
Makhzum came to his help, and men of Bani Hashim wanted to render help, but Abu 
Jahl sent them away saying: "Let Abu ‘Ummarah alone, by All?  I did revile his 
nephew shamelessly.[Ibn Hisham 1/291; Rahmat-ul-lil'alameen 1/68; Mukhtasar 
Seerat Ar-Rasool p.66]" In fact, Hamzah’s conversion derived initially from the pride 
of a man who would not accept the notion of others humiliating his relative. Later on, 
however, All?  purified his nature and he managed to grasp the most trustworthy 
hand-hold (Faith in All? ). He proved to be a source of great strength to the Islamic 
Faith and its followers. [Mushtasar Seerat Ar-