a. 
On the other hand, the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] cherished them to pay charities 
and to spend the best of their fortunes in the way of Allâh. 
No sooner had the Muslims heard the voice of the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] calling 
them to fight the Byzantines than they rushed to comply with his orders. With great 
speed they started getting ready for war. Tribes and phratries from here and there 
began pouring in Madinah. Almost all the Muslims responded positively. Only those 
who had weakness at their hearts favoured to stay behind. They were only three 
people. Even the needy and the poor who could not afford a ride came to the 
Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] asking for one so that they would be able to share in the 
fight against the Byzantines. But when he said: 
"...‘I can find no mounts for you’ they turned back while their eyes 
overflowing with tears of grief that they could not find anything to spend 
(for Jihad)." [Al-Qur'an 9:92] 
The Muslims raced to spend out money and to pay charities to provide this invasion. 
‘Uthman, for instance, who had already rigged two hundred, saddled camels to travel 
to Ash-Sham, presented them all with two hundred ounces (of gold) as charity. He 
also fetched a thousand dinars and cast them all into the lap of the Messenger of 
Allâh [pbuh], who turned them over and said: "From this day on nothing will harm 
‘Uthman regardless of what he does." [Jami' At-Tirmidhi 2/211 (The virtues of 'Uthman)] Again 

275
and again ‘Uthman gave till his charity toped to nine hundred camels and a hundred 
horses, besides the money he paid. 
Abdur Rahman bin ‘Awf, on his side, paid two hundred silver ounces, whereas Abu 
Bakr paid the whole money he had and left nothing but Allâh and His Messenger as a 
fortune for his family. ‘Umar paid half his fortune. Al-‘Abbas gifted a lot of money. 
Talhah, Sa‘d bin ‘Ubadah and Muhammad bin Maslamah, gave money for the welfare 
of the invasion. ‘Asim bin ‘Adi, on his turn, offered ninety camel-burdens of dates. 
People raced to pay little and much charities alike. One of them gave the only half 
bushel (or the only bushel) he owned. Women shared in this competition by giving 
the things they owned; such as musk, armlets, anklets, ear-rings and rings. No one 
abstained from spending out money, or was too mean to grant money or anything