aunch war operations against the Muslims especially the 
secluded garrisons that housed the women and children of the Muslims. On the 
authority of Ibn Ishaq, Safiyah [R], daughter of ‘Abdul Muttalib happened to be in a 
garrison with Hassan bin Thabit as well as some women and children. Safiyah said: 
"A Jew was spotted lurking around our site, which was vulnerable to any enemy 
attacks because there were no men to defend it. I informed Hassan that I was 
suspicious of that man’s presence near us. He might take us by surprise now that the 
Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] and the Muslims are too busy to come to our aid, why 
don’t you get down and kill him? Hassan answered that he would not do it, so I took 
a bar of wood, went down and struck the Jew to death. I returned and asked Hassan 
to loot him but again Hassan refused to do that.[ibid 2/228] This event had a far reaching 
effect and discouraged the Jews from conducting further attacks thinking that those 
sites were fortified and protected by Muslim fighters. They, however, went on 
providing the idolaters with supplies in token of their support against the Muslims. 

198
On hearing this bad news, the Messenger [pbuh] despatched four Muslim prominent 
leaders Sa‘d bin Mu‘adh, Sa‘d bin ‘Ubada, ‘Abdullah bin Rawaha and Khawat bin 
Jubair for investigation but warning against any sort of spreading panic amongst the 
Muslims and advising that they should declare in public that the rumours are 
groundless if they happen to be so. Unfortunately the four men discovered that the 
news was true and that the Jews announced openly that no pact of alliance existed 
any longer with Muhammad [pbuh]. The Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] was briefed on 
this situation, and the Muslims understood their critical position with the horrible 
danger implied therein. Their back was vulnerable to the attacks of Banu Quraiza, 
and a huge army with no way to connive at in front, while their women and children 
unprotected standing in between. In this regard, Allâh says: 
"And when the eyes grew wild and the hearts reached to the throats, and 
you were harbouring doubts about Allâh. There, the believers were tried and 
shaken with a mighty shaking." 
[Al-Qur'an 33:10, 11] 
Now that the Muslims were shut in within the Trench on the defensive, the hypocrites 
taunted them with having indulged in delusive hopes of defeating Kisra, emperor of 
Persia, and Caesar, emperor of the Romans. They began to sow the seeds of 
defeatism, and pretended to withdraw for the defence of their homes, though these 
were in no way exposed to danger. Here, Allâh says: 
"And when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease (of 
doubts) said, ‘Allâh and His Messenger ([pbuh]) promised us nothing but 
delusions!’ And when a party of them said: ‘O people of Yathrib (Al-
Madinah), there is no stand (possible) for you (against the enemy attack!) 
therefore go back!’ And a band of them asked for permission of the Prophet 
([pbuh]) saying: ‘Truly, our homes lie open (to the enemy).’ And they lay 
not open. They but wished to flee." [Al-Qur'an 33:12, 13] 
The Messenger of Allâh, [pbuh] wrapped himself in his robe and began to meditate 
on the perfidy of Banu Quraiza. The spirit of hopefulness prevailed over him and he 
rose to his feet saying: 
"Allâh is Great. Hearken you Muslims, to Allâh’s good tidings of victory and 
support." 
He then started to lay decisive plans aiming at protecting the women and children, 
and sent some fighters back to Madinah to guard them against any surprise assault 
by the enemy. The second step was to take action that could lead to undermining 
the ranks of the disbelieving confederates. There, he had in mind to conclude a sort 
of reconciliation with the chiefs of Ghatfan on the basis of donating them a third of 
Madinah’s fruit crops. He sought the advice of his chief Companions, namely, Sa‘d 
bin Mu‘adh and Sa‘d bin ‘Ubadah, whose reply went as follows: 
"O Messenger of Allâh! If it is Allâh’s injunction, then we have to obey, but if it is a 
new course you want to follow just to provide security for us then we don’t need it. 
We experienced those people in polytheism and idolatry and we can safely say that 
they don’t need the fruit of our orchards, they rather need to exterminate us 
completely. Now that Allâh has honoured us with Islam, I believe the best recourse 
in this situation is to put them to the sword." Thereupon the Prophet [pbuh] 

199
corrected their Belief saying: "My new policy is being forged to provide