e is to him, created something that led to the 
dissension of the enemies of Islam and later on to their full defeat. A man from the 
tribe of Ghatfan called Na‘im bin Mas‘ud asked to be admitted in the audience of the 
Prophet [pbuh]. He declared that he had embraced Islam secretly and asked the 
Prophet [pbuh] to order him do anything that might benefit the Muslims. The Prophet 
[pbuh] asked him to do anything that could help the Muslims in the present distress 
and use any strategem of avail. The man, in a shuttle movement, between the Jews, 
Quraish and Ghatfan managed to incite each party to let down the other. He went to 
see the chiefs of Banu Quraiza and whispered in their ears not to trust Quraish nor 
fight with them unless the latter pledged some hostages. He tried to lend support to 
his counsel by claiming that Quraish would forsake them if they perceived that 
victory over Muhammad [pbuh] was far fetched, and the Muslims then would have 
terrible revenge on them. Na‘im, then headed for the camp of Quraish and managed 
to practise a similar strategem in its final result but different in content. He claimed 
that he felt that the Jews regretted breaching their covenant with Muhammad [pbuh] 
and his followers. He told them that the Jews maintained regular correspondence 
with the Muslims to the effect that Quraishite hostages be sent to the camp of the 
Muslims with full Jewish allegiance paid to them as already agreed upon. Na‘im then 
exhorted Quraish not to send hostages to the Jews. On a third errand, he did the 
same with the people of Ghatfan. 
On Saturday night, Shawwal 5 A.H., both Quraish and Ghatfan despatched envoys to 
the Jews exhorting them to go into war against Muhammad [pbuh]. The Jews sent 
back messages that they would not fight on Saturday. They added that they needed 
hostages from them to guarantee their consistency. On receiving the replies, Quraish 
and Ghatfan came to believe Na‘im’s words fully. Therefore, they sent a message to 
the Jews again inviting them to war and asking them to preclude that condition of 
hostages. Na‘im’s scheme proved successful, and a state of distrust and suspicion 
among the disbelieving allies prevailed and reduced their morale to deplorable 
degree. 
Meanwhile, the Muslims were preoccupied supplicating their Lord to protect their 
homes and provide security for their families. The Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] on his 
part invoked Allâh’s wrath on the Confederates supplicating: 
"Oh, Allâh! You are quick in account, You are the sender of the Book, we 
beseech You to defeat the confederates." [Sahih Al-Bukhari 1/411,2/590] 
Allâh the Glorious, the Exalted, responded to the call of the Muslims on the spot. 
Coupled with the dissension and variance that found their way into the hearts of the 
disbelievers, forces of nature — wind, rain and cold wearied them, tents were blown 
down, cooking vessels and other equipage overthrown. 
That very cold night the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] despatched Hudhaifa bin Al-
Yaman to hunt around for news about the enemy. He found out that they were 
preparing to leave frustrated for their inability to achieve their target. Allâh did really 
fulfill His Promise, spared the Muslims fighting a formidable army, supported His 
slave (Muhammad [pbuh]) and inflicted a heavy blow on the Confederates. 

200
The battle of the Trench took place in the fifth year Hijri. The siege of Madinah 
started in Shawwal and ended in Dhul Qa‘dah, i.e. it lasted for over a month. It was 
in fact a battle of nerves rather than of losses. No bitter fighting was recorded; 
nevertheless, it was one of the most decisive battles in the early history of Islam and 
proved beyond a shadow of doubt that no forces, however huge, could ever 
exterminate the nascent Islamic power growing steadily in Madinah. When Allâh 
obliged the Confederates to evacuate, H