sly and put him to 
unspeakable tortures. [Ibn Hisham 1/320] 
The uncle of ‘Uthman bin ‘Affan used to wrap ‘Uthman in a mat of palm leaves, and 
set fire under him. When Umm Mus‘ab bin ‘Umair heard of her son’s conversion, she 
put him to starvation and then expelled him from her house. He used to enjoy full 
luxurious easy life, but in the aftermath of the tortures he sustained, his skin got 
wizened, and he assumed a horrible physical appearance. [Rahmat-ul-lil'alameen 
1/57; Talqeeh Ahl-al-Athar p.60] 
Bilal, the slave of Omaiyah bin Khalaf, was severely beaten by his master when the 
latter came to know of his conversion to Islam. Sometimes a rope was put around 
his neck and street boys were made to drag him through the streets and even across 
the hillocks of Makkah. At times he was subjected to prolonged deprivation of food 
and drink; at others he was bound up, made to lie down on the burning sand and 
under the crushing burden of heavy stones. Similar other measures were resorted to 
in order to force him to recant. All this proved in vain. He persisted in his belief in 
the Oneness of All? . On one such occasion, Abu Bakr was passing by; moved by 
pity, he purchased and emancipated him from slavery. [Ibn Hisham 1/317-318; 
Rahmat-ul-lil'alameen 1/57] 
Another victim of the highhandedness of Quraish was ‘Ammar bin Yasir, a freed slave 
of Bani Makhzoum. He, along with his mother and father, embraced Islam in its early 

62
phase. They were repeatedly made to lie on the burning sand and were beaten 
severely. ‘Ammar was at times tossed up on embers. The Prophet [pbuh] was greatly 
moved by the atrocities which were being perpetrated upon ‘Ammar and his family. 
He always comforted them and raised his hand in prayer and said: "Be patient, you 
will verily find your abode in the Paradise." Yasir, the father, died because of 
repeated tortures. Sumaiyah, ‘Ammar’s mother was bayoneted to death by Abu Jahl 
himself, and thus merited the title of the first woman martyr in Islam. ‘Ammar 
himself was subjected to various modes of torture and was always threatened to 
sustain severe suffering unless he abused Muhammad [pbuh] and recanted to Al-Lat 
and ‘Uzza. In a weak moment, he uttered a word construed as recantation though 
his heart never wavered and he came back once to the Prophet [pbuh] , who 
consoled him for his pain and confirmed his faith. Immediately afterwards the 
following verse was revealed: 
"Whoever disbelieved in All?  after his belief, except him who is forced thereto and 
whose heart is at rest with Faith —." [Al-Qur'an 16:106] 
Abu Fakeeh, Aflah, a freed slave of Bani ‘Abd Ad-Dar was the third of those helpless 
victims. The oppressors used to fasten his feet with a rope and drag him in the 
streets of Makkah. [Eijaz At-Tanzil p.53] 
Khabbab bin Al-Aratt was also an easy victim to similar outrages on every possible 
occasion. He experienced exemplary torture and maltreatment. The Makkan 
polytheists used to pull his hair and twist his neck, and made him lie on burning coal 
with a big rock on his chest to prevent him from escaping. Some Muslims of rank and 
position were wrapped in the raw skins of camels and thrown away, and others were 
put in armours and cast on burning sand in the scorching sun of Arabia. [Talqeeh 
Fuhoom Ahl-al-Athar p.60; Rahmat-ul-lil'alameen 1/57] 
Even the women converts were not spared, and the list is too long to include all of 
them. Zanirah, An-Nahdiyah and her daughter, Umm ‘Ubais and many others had 
their full share of persecution at the hand of the oppressors — ‘Umar bin Al-Khattab 
included — of cours