Muslims who were martyred was controversial, but it ranged between 
16 and 18, while the number of Jews killed came to 93. 
The rest of Khaibar also fell to the Muslims. Allâh cast fear into the hearts of the 
people of Fadak, a village standing to the north of Khaibar, and they hastened to ask 
for peace, and be allowed to leave in safety, and give up their wealth in return for 
that. The Prophet [pbuh] entered into an agreement with them similar to the 
previous one with the people of Khaibar. Fadak was exclusively the Prophet’s 
because neither Muslim cavalry nor camelry were involved in fight thereby. 
No sooner had the Prophet [pbuh] discharged the affair of Khaibar than he started a 
fresh move towards Wadi Al-Qura, another Jewish colony in Arabia. He mobilized his 
forces and divided them into three regiments with four banners entrusted to Sa‘d bin 
‘Ubada, Al-Hubab bin Mundhir, ‘Abbad bin Bishr and Sahl bin Haneef. Prior to 
fighting, he invited the Jews to embrace Islam but all his words and exhortations fell 
on deaf ears. Eleven of the Jews were killed one after another and with each one 
newly killed, a fresh call was extended inviting those people to profess the new faith. 
Fighting went on ceaselessly for approximately two days and resulted in full 
surrender of the Jews. Their land was conquered, and a lot of booty fell in the hands 
of the Muslims. 
The Prophet [pbuh]  stayed in Wadi Al-Qura for four days, distributed the booty 
among the Muslim fighters and reached an agreement with the Jews similar to that 
of Khaibar. [Za'd Al-Ma'ad 2/146, 147] 
The Jews of Taima’, hearing beforehand about the successive victories of the Muslim 
army and the defeats that their brethren, the Jews, had sustained, showed no 

239
resistance when the Prophet [pbuh] reached their habitation. On the contrary, they 
took the initiative and offered to sign a reconciliation treaty to the effect that they 
receive protection but pay tribute in return. Having achieved his objective and 
subdued the Jews completely, the Prophet [pbuh] made his way back home and 
arrived in Madinah in late Safar or early Rabi‘ Al-Awwal 7 A.H. 
It is noteworthy that the Prophet [ pbuh], being the best amongst war experts, 
realized quite readily that evacuating Madinah after the lapse of the prohibited 
months (Muharram, Dhul Qa‘da and Dhul Hijja) would not be wise at all with the 
presence of the desert bedouins roaming in its vicinity. Such a careless attitude, the 
Prophet [pbuh] believed, would tempt the undisciplined mob to practise their 
favourite hobby of plundering, looting and all acts of piracy. This premonition always 
in mind, the Prophet [pbuh] despatched Aban bin Sa‘id at the head of a platoon to 
deter those bedouins and forestall any attempt at raiding the headquarters of the 
nascent Islamic state during his absence in Khaibar. Aban achieved his t