Having subdued two powerful sides of the Confederates coalition, the Prophet [pbuh] 
started preparations to discipline the third party, i.e. the desert bedouins, who took 
Najd for habitation, and continued in their usual practices of looting and plundering. 
Unlike the Jews of Khaibar and people of Makkah, they had a liking for living in the 
wilderness dispersed in scattered spots, hence the difficulty of bringing them under 
control, and the futility of carrying out deterrent campaigns against them. However, 
the Prophet [pbuh] was determined to put an end to this unacceptable situation and 
called the Muslims around him to get ready to launch a decisive campaign against 
those harassing rebels. Meanwhile it was reported to him that Bani Muharib and 
Banu Tha‘lbah of the Ghatfan tribe were gathering army in order to encounter the 
Muslims. The Prophet [pbuh] proceeded towards Najd at the head of 400 or 700 
men, after he had mandated Abu Dhar - in another version, ‘Uthman bin ‘Affan - to 
dispose the affairs of Madinah during his absence. The Muslim fighters penetrated 
deep into their land until they reached a spot called Nakhlah where they came across 
some bedouins of Ghatfan, but no fighting took place because the latter had agreed 
to go into reconciliation with the Muslims. The Prophet [pbuh] led his followers that 
day in a prayer of fear. 
Al-Bukhari, on the authority of Abu Musa Al-Ash‘ari, narrated that they set out on an 
expedition with the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh]. "We were six in number and had 
(with us) only one camel which we rode turn by turn. Our feet were injured. My feet 
were so badly injured that my nails came off. We, therefore, bandaged our feet with 
rags, so this expedition was called Dhat-ur-Riqa‘ (i.e. the expedition of rags.)" [Sahih Al-
Bukhari 2/592; Sahih Muslim 2/118] 
Jabir narrated: In the course of Dhat-ur-Riqa‘ expedition, we came to a leafy tree 
where the Prophet [pbuh] sat shading himself off the burning sun. The others 
dispersed here and there seeking shelter from heat. The Prophet [pbuh] had a short 
nap after he had hung his sword on the tree. A polytheist, meanwhile came, seized 
the sword and unsheathed it. 
The Prophet [pbuh] woke up to find his sword drawn in the man’s hand. The bedouin 
here asked the Prophet (unarmed then): "Who would hold me back from killing you 
now?" The Prophet [pbuh] then answered: "It is Allâh." In another version, it was 
reported that the Prophet [pbuh] took the sword when it had fallen down and the 
man said: "You (the Prophet) are the best one to hold a sword." The Prophet [pbuh] 
asked the man if he would testify to the Oneness of Allâh and the Messengership of 
Muhammad. The Arabian answered that he would never engage in a fight against 
him, nor would he ally people fighting the Muslims. The Prophet [pbuh] set the man 
free and let him go to his people to say to them that he had seen the best one 
among all people. [Mukhtasar Seerat Ar-Rasool p.264; Fath Al-Bari 7/416] 
A woman from the Arabians was taken prisoner in the context of this battle. Her 
husband, on hearing the news, swore he would never stop until he had shed the 
blood of a Muslim. Secretly at night, he approached the camp of the Muslims when 
he saw two sentries stationed there to alert the Muslims against any emergency. He 
shot the first one, Abbad bin Bishr, who was observing prayer, with an arrow but he 
did not stop prayer, he simply pulled it out. Then he was shot by three other arrows 

241
but would not interrupt his prayer. After he had