ng the most attentive and the keenest to study jurisprudence and learn 
Qur’ân, ‘Uthman bin Abi Al-‘As was appointed by the Messenger of Allâh 
[pbuh] a prince on his people. His keenness and carefulness to learn the 
Qur’ân and study jurisprudence were clearly discernible through his behaviour 
during their stay. 
Everyday morning, the group of delegates used to go and see the Messenger 
of Allâh [pbuh]. Being the youngest one, ‘Uthman bin Abi Al-‘As was left 
behind with their camels and things to keep an eye on. At noon when they 
came back and slept, ‘Uthman used to go to the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh]in 
order to learn the Qur’ân and inquire about religious matters. If it happened 
that the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] was asleep, he would then go to Abu Bakr 
for the same purpose. With the passage of time, he turned out to be a source 
of blessing to his people. For at the Apostasy Times (Ar-Riddah) when Thaqif 
were determined to apostatize, he addressed them saying: "O, folkmen of 
Thaqif! You have been the latest at embracing Islam, so do not be the first to 
apostatize." Consequently they gave up apostasy and clung fast to Islam. 
The group of delegates returned home but they were determined to conceal 
the truth for a while. They told their people to expect fight at any moment. 
They pretended to be grieved and depressed. They claimed that the 
Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] demanded that they should embrace Islam and 
abandon adultery, drinking wine and dealing with usury and some other 
things, or else he would fight them. Seized by the arrogance and zeal of Al-
Jahiliyah (pre-Islamic traditions), Thaqif remained for days intent on fighting. 
Then Allâh cast terror and dismay in their hearts in such a way that they gave 
up fighting and thought that the delegation should go back to him and 
announce their approval. It was until then that the group of delegates told 
them the truth and revealed the items of their peace-talk with the Prophet, 
consequently Thaqif embraced Islam. 
The Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] sent some men to demolish the idol called "Al-
Lat" under the command of Khalid bin Al-Waleed. Al-Mugheerah bin Shu‘bah, 
stood to his feet, held the hoe and the ax and said: "By Allâh, I will make you 
laugh at Thaqif." He struck with them, and pretended to fall down while 
running. The people of Thaqif trembled at that sight and said: "May Allâh 
dismay Al-Mugheerah off. The goddess has killed him." Hearing that Al-
Mugheerah leapt up to his feet and said: "May Allâh bring shame on you. Al-
Lat is nothing but a mass of dirt and stones." Then he struck the door and 
broke it. He mounted its highest wall, and so did the other men. They 
knocked Al-Lat down till they levelled it with the ground. Then they dug up its 
foundation and brought out its jewels and garments; to the great 
astonishment of Thaqif. Khalid bin Al-Waleed and his group came back to the 
Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] carrying Al-Lat’s jewels and garments. The 
Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] distributed them and thanked Allâh for helping his 
Prophet