128
5. Buwat Invasion. It took place in Rabi‘ Al-Awwal 2 A.H., i.e. 623 A.D. The 
Prophet [pbuh], at the head of 200 companions, marched for Buwat to 
intercept a caravan belonging to Quraish comprising 100 Quraishites, Omaiya 
bin Khalaf among them, and 2500 camels. When he reached Buwat, the 
caravan had left. Before leaving Madinah, he mandated Sa‘d bin Mu‘adh to 
dispose the affairs until his return. 
6. Safwan Invasion. In Rabi‘ Al-Awwal 2 A.H., i.e. 623 A.D. Karz bin Jabir at the 
head of a small group of polytheists raided the pastures of Madinah and 
looted some animals. The Prophet [pbuh] at the head of 70 men left Madinah 
to fight the aggressors. He went in their pursuit till he reached a place called 
Safwan near Badr but could not catch up with them. This invasion came to be 
known as the preliminary Badr Invasion. During his absence, the Prophet 
[pbuh] entrusted Zaid bin Harithah with the disposition of the affairs in 
Madinah. The standard was white in colour and entrusted to ‘Ali bin Abi Talib 
to carry. 
7. Dhil ‘Ushairah Invasion. It was in Jumada-al-Ula and Jumada-al-Akhirah the 
first or second 2 A.H., i.e. November-December 623 A.D. The Prophet [pbuh] 
at the head of 150-200 Muslim volunteers, with 30 camels which they rode 
turn by turn, set out to intercept a Quraishite caravan. He reached Dhil 
‘Ushairah but the camels had left some days before. These camels were the 
same that he went out to intercept on their return from Syria, and were the 
direct reason for the break out of the battle of Badr. In the process of this 
campaign, the Prophet [pbuh] contracted a non-aggression pact with Bani 
Madlij and their allies Bani Dhumrah. Abu Salama bin ‘Abd Al-Asad Al-
Makhzumi was mandated to rule Madinah in his absence. 
8. The Platoon of Nakhlah. It took place in Rajab 2 A.H., i.e. January 624 A.H. 
The Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] despatched ‘Abdullah bin Jahsh Asadi to 
Nakhlah at the head of 12 Emigrants with six camels. ‘Abdullah was given a 
letter by the Prophet [pbuh] but was instructed to read it only after two days. 
He followed the instructions and discovered that he was asked to go on to a 
place called Nakhlah standing between Makkah and At-Ta’if, intercept a 
caravan for Quraish and collect news about their intentions. He disclosed the 
contents of the letters to his fellows who blindly obeyed the orders. At 
Nakhlah, the caravan passed carrying loads of raisins (dried grapes), food 
stuff and other commodities. Notable polytheists were also there such as ‘Amr 
bin Al-Hadrami, ‘Uthman and Naufal, sons of ‘Abdullah bin Al-Mugheerah and 
others... The Muslims held consultations among themselves with respect to 
fighting them taking into account Rajab which was a sacred month (during 
which, along with Dhul Hijja, Dhul Qa‘da and Muharram, war activities were 
suspended as was the custom in Arabia then). At last they agreed to engage 
with them in fighting. ‘Amr bin Al-Hadrami was shot dead by an arrow, 
‘Uthman and Al-Hakam were captured whereas Naufal escaped. They came 
back with the booty and the two prisoners. They set aside one-fifth of the 
booty assigned to Allâh and His Messenger, and took the rest. The Messenger 
disapproved of that act and suspended any action as regards the camels and 
the two captives on account of the prohibited months already mentioned. The 
polytheists, on their part, exploited this golden opportunity to calumniate the 
Muslims and accuse them of violating what is Divinely inviolable. This idle talk 
brought about a painful headache to Muhammad’s Companions, until at last 
they were relieved when the Revelation came down giving a decisive answer 
and stating quite explicitly that the behaviour of the polytheists in the whole 

129
process was much more heinous and far more serious than the act of the 
Muslims:  
"They ask you concerning fighting in the sacred months (i.e. 1st, 7th, 
11th and 12th months of the Islamic calendar). Say, ‘Fighting therein 
is a great (transgression) but a greater (transgression) with Allâh is 
to prevent mankind from following the way of Allâh, to disbelieve in 
Him, to prevent access to Al-Masjid-Al-Harâm (at Makkah), and to 
drive out its inhabitants, and Al-Fitnah is worse than killing." [Al-
Qur'an 2:217] 
The Words of Allâh were quite clear and said that the tumult created by the 
polytheists was groundless. The sacred inviolable sanctities had been repeatedly 
violated in the long process of fighting Islam and persecuting its adherents. The 
wealth of the Muslims as well as their homes had already been violated and their 
Prophet [pbuh] had been the target of repeated attempts on his life. In short, that 
sort of propaganda could deservedly be described as impudence and prostitution