ased, 
had ceased to exist in the light of that Divine ultimatum. 

54
  
Shouting the Truth and the Polytheists’ Reaction 
The Prophet’s voice kept reverberating in Makkah until the following verse was 
revealed: 
"Therefore proclaim openly (All? ’s Message — Islamic Monotheism), that which you 
are commanded, and turn away from Al-Mushrik?  (polytheists)." [Al-Qur'an 15:94] 
He then commenced discrediting the superstitious practices of idolatry, revealing its 
worthless reality and utter impotence, and giving concrete proofs that idolatry per se 
or taking it as the media through which an idolater could come in contact with All? , 
is manifest falsehood. 
The Makkans, on their part, burst into outrage and disapproval. Muhammad’s [pbuh] 
words created a thunderbolt that turned the Makkan time-honoured ideological life 
upside down. They could ill afford to hear someone attaching to polytheists and 
idolaters, the description of straying people. They started to rally their resources to 
settle down the affair, quell the onward marching revolution and deal a pre-emptive 
strike to its votaries before it devours and crushes down their consecrated traditions 
and long standing heritage. The Makkans had the deep conviction that denying 
godship to anyone save All?  and that belief in the Divine Message and the Hereafter 
are interpreted in terms of complete compliance and absolute commitment, and this 
in turn leaves no area at all for them to claim authority over themselves and over 
their wealth, let alone their subordinates. In short, their arrogated religiously-based 
supremacy and highhandedness would no longer be in effect; their pleasures would 
be subordinated to the pleasures of All?  and His Messenger and lastly they would 
have to abstain from incurring injustices on those whom they falsely deemed to be 
weak, and perpetrating dreadful sins in their everyday life. They had already been 
fully aware of these meanings, that is why their souls would not condescend to 
accept this ‘disgraceful’ position not out of motives based on dignity and honour but 
rather because: 
"Nay! (Man denies Resurrection and Reckoning. So) he desires to continue 
committing sins." [Al-Qur'an 75:5] 
They had been aware of all these consequences but they could afford to do nothing 
before an honest truthful man who was the highest example of good manners and 
human values. They had never known such an example in the history of their folks or 
grandfathers. What would they do? They were baffled, and they had the right to be 
so. 
Following careful deliberations, they hit upon the only target available, i.e. to contact 
the Messenger’s uncle, Abu Talib and request him to intervene and advise his 
nephew to stop his activities. In order to attach a serious and earnest stamp to their 
demand, they chose to touch the most sensitive area in Arabian life, viz., ancestral 
pride. They addressed Abu Talib in the following manner: "O Abu Talib! Your nephew 
curses our gods; finds faults with our way of life, mocks at our religion and degrades 
our forefathers; either you must stop him, or you must let us get at him. For you are 
in the same opposition as we are in opposition to him; and we will rid you of him." 
Abu Talib tried t