of love and devotion were revealed by the 
truthful women believers; in no way less great than the men’s heroic deeds in the 
fight. 
Hamnah bint Jahsh met the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] on the way back, and he 
announced the death of her brother — ‘Abdullah bin Jahsh — to her. She said: "To 
Allâh we belong and to Him we will verily return. I ask Allâh’s forgiveness." Then he 
announced the death of her maternal uncle Hamzah bin ‘Abdul Muttalib. She said: 
"To Allâh we belong and to Him we will verily return. I ask Allâh’s forgiveness." But 
when he announced the death of her husband Mus‘ab bin ‘Umair to her, she shouted 
and woed. Seeing her doing so, the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] said: "The woman’s 
husband is extremely dear to her." [Ibn Hisham 2/98] 
He passed by a woman of Bani Dinar whose husband, father and brother were all 
killed at Uhud. When their death announced, she said: "How is the Messenger of 
Allâh [pbuh] ?" They said: "Well indeed. O mother of so... Thanks for Allâh; he is 
well and as good as you desire." She said: "Let me see him." They pointed at him. 
Seeing him she said: "All misfortunes are nothing so long as you are safe." [Ibn Hisham 
2/99] 
Umm Sa‘d bin Mu‘adh came running to see the Prophet [pbuh]. At that time her son 
was holding the rein of his mare. Seeing his mother, he said to the Prophet [pbuh]: 
"O Messenger of Allâh [pbuh]. This is my mother." The Prophet [pbuh] said: "She is 
welcome"; and he stopped and waited for her. When she drew near, he consoled her, 
for her killed son ‘Amr bin Mu‘adh. But she said: "So long as I see you are safe, my 
misfortune will certainly go into oblivion." Then the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] 
supplicated Allâh for the relatives of those who were killed at Uhud and said: "Cheer 
up! Umm Sa‘d and bear good tidings to their kindred that all their people killed in the 
battle are comrades in Paradise and they are intercessors for all their kinsfolk." She 
replied, "O Messenger of Allâh, we are satisfied. Who would cry on them after this 
cheerful news?" Then she resumed saying: "O Messenger of Allâh, invoke Allâh (for 
those who stayed behind)" He said: "O Allâh keep sorrow off their hearts! And 
console them with their misfortunes. Compensate those who stayed behind with 
goodness and welfare." [As-Seerat Al-Halabiyah 2/47] 
In the evening of that day — i.e. Saturday, the seventh of Shawwal, 3rd year A.H. — 
the Messenger arrived in Madinah. As soon as he reached his house, he handed his 
sword to his daughter Fatimah and said: "O daughter, wash the blood off this sword. 
By Allâh it has been helpful to me today." ‘Ali bin Abi Talib handed her his sword and 
said: "And wash the blood of this sword too. By Allâh, it has been helpful to me 

181
today." So the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] said: "Sahl bin Haneef and Abu Dujana 
have been as courageous as you are in the fight." [Ibn Hisham 2/100] 
Most of the narrations confirmed that seventy Muslims were killed and most of them, 
sixty-five, Helpers; forty-one of whom were from Khazraj and twenty-four from Aws. 
This, besides one Jew and four Emigrant