296
The Success and Impact of the Call 
Before we move one more step and meditate on the last days of the Messenger of 
Allâh’s life, we ought to cast a quick glance at the great work that was a peculiarity 
of his. That very peculiarity that made him excel all other Prophets and Messengers 
and made him so superb that Allâh made him atop the formers and the latters. It 
was him that was addressed by: 
"O you wrapped in garments (i.e Prophet Muhammad [pbuh])! Stand (to 
pray) all night, except a little." [Al-Qur'an 73:1,2] 
And said: 
"O you (Muhammad [pbuh]) enveloped (in garments). Arise and warn!" [Al-
Qur'an 74:1,2] 
So he arose and kept on like that for over twenty years. During those years he 
undertook to carry the burdens of the great expectations on his shoulders for the 
sake of the whole mankind and humanity, the Faith and Jihad in various fields. 
The Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] undertook the burdens of struggle and Al-Jihad in the 
conscience of mankind which was then drowning in the illusions of Al-Jahiliyah and 
its images that were loaded with the ground weights and gravitations. He took upon 
his shoulder to free man’s conscience which was chained with desires and lusts. As 
soon as he had freed the conscience of his Companions from the burdens and heaps 
of Al-Jahiliyah and earthly life, he started another battle in another field or rather 
successive battles against the enemy of Allâh’s Call, and against those who conspired 
against it. It was a battle against those who conspired against the believers and 
against those who were so careful to tend that pure plant in its implantation before it 
grew up and stretched its roots in soil and extended its branches up into the air and 
thus dawned upon other areas. No sooner had he finished the battles in the Arabian 
Peninsula than the Byzantines began preparations to destroy this new nation on the 
northern borders. 
The first battle — i.e. the battle of conscience — was not over yet. It was in fact a 
perpetual one. Satan, who was its leader did not spare a moment without exercising 
his activity in the depth of human conscience. Muhammad [pbuh], on the other hand 
was attending on calling to Allâh’s religion there and he was keen on fighting that 
perpetual battle in all fields in spite of their hard circumstances and the world’s 
conspiracy against him. He went on calling effectively and actively surrounded by the 
believers who were seeking security through ceaseless toil and great patience. 
The Companions acted perpetually and patiently by day and they spent the night 
worshipping their Lord, reciting and memorizing the Qur’ân glorifying and magnifying 
Allâh and imploring Him by night; all that at the behest of their Lord, the All-Mighty. 
[Fi Zilal Al-Qur'an 29/168,169] 
For over twenty years the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] had been leading that 
progressive steady battle, disregarding any other affairs that kept him off that noble 
goal. He went on that way till the Islamic Call proved to be successful on a large 
scale that puzzl