A Consultation Assembly for a Defence Plan 
The scouting party of Madinah conveyed the news of the Makkan army step by step. 
Then the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] held a head military consultation assembly to 
exchange views about the situation. He told them about a dream he had. He said: 
"By Allâh, I have dreamt of — I implore Allâh to be a dream of bounty — cows 
slaughtered and that there was a groove at the pointed top of my sword, and that I 
had inserted my hand into an immune armour." 
The interpretation of ‘the cows’ was that some of his men were killed, and ‘the 
groove at the pointed top of his sword’ was that a member of his House would be 
hurt. As for ‘the armour’ it was Madinah. Then he offered a suggestion that his 
Companions should not go out of Madinah and that they should encamp themselves 
within the city. He was of the opinion that the enemies should be left in the open to 
exhaust themselves and thus the Muslims would not risk a battle. But if they thought 
of attacking Madinah, Muslim men would be ready to fight them at the mouths of 
lanes; whereas Muslim-women would help from over the house roofs." ‘Abdullah bin 
Ubai bin Salul — the head of the hypocrites; who attended the meeting as a chief of 
Al-Khazraj — supported the Prophet [pbuh]’s plan. 
As a matter of fact his agreement was not based on the righteousness of the plan 
but rather on personal benefit. He did not want to fight. On the contrary he secretly 
aimed at being far away from fight. However it was Allâh’s Will that he should be 
disclosed and disgraced in public — for the first time. It was His Will that the curtain 
which concealed their disbelief behind should be uncovered and pulled down. Allâh’s 
Will enabled the Muslims to recognize the reality of those snakes that were creeping 
within their garments and inside the sleeves of their clothes. Thanks to Allâh they 
recognized them in one of the most critical times of their lives. 

157
Some of the best honourable Companions, who had missed Al-Jihâd in Badr invasion, 
suggested that the Prophet [pbuh] should go out of Madinah and urged him to 
accept their point of view. One of them said: "O, Messenger of Allâh [pbuh], for long 
time we have been looking forward to this day; and we have implored Allâh to make 
such a day draw near. Thanks to Allâh it is time to fight. So let us go out and fight 
our enemies lest they should think that we have lost heart and do not dare to fight 
them." Hamza bin Abdul Muttalib the paternal uncle of the Prophet [pbuh], who had 
already covered the ornaments of his sword with idolaters’ blood in Badr Battle, was 
ahead of those enthusiastics who urged him to go out and meet the disbelievers. He 
said to the Prophet [pbuh]: "By Allâh, Who has sent the Book down unto you, I will 
not taste food till I fight them with my sword outside Madinah."[As-Seerah Al-Halabiyah 
2/14]  
Af