the cause of All?  after Abraham and Lot 
[AWS]." 
They sneaked out of Makkah under the heavy curtain of a dark night and headed for 
the sea where two boats happened to be sailing for Abyssinia (Ethiopia), their 
destination. News of their intended departure reached the ears of Quraish, so some 
men were despatched in their pursuit, but the believers had already left Shuaibah 
Port towards their secure haven where they were received warmly and accorded due 
hospitality. 
In Ramadan of the same year, the Prophet [pbuh] went into the Holy Sanctuary 
where there was a large host of Quraish polytheists, including some notables and 
celebrities. Suddenly he began reciting S? ah An-Najm (Chapter 41 — The Star). The 
awe-inspiring Words of All?  descended unawares upon them and they immediately 
got stunned by them. It was the first time for them to be shocked by the truthful 
Revelation. It had formerly been the favourite trick of those people who wished to 
dishonour Revelation, not only not to listen to it themselves but also to talk loudly 
and insolently when it was being read, so that even the true listeners may not be 
able to hear. They used to think that they were drowning the Voice of All? ; in fact, 
they were piling up misery for themselves, for All? ’s Voice can never be silenced, 
"And those who disbelieve say: 
"Listen not to this Qur’? , and make noise in the midst of its (recitation) that you 
may overcome." [Al-Qur'an 41:26]. 
When the unspeakably fascinating Words of All?  came into direct contact with their 
hearts, they were entranced and got oblivious of the materialistic world around them 
and were caught in a state of full attentiveness to the Divine Words to such an 
extent that when the Prophet [pbuh] reached the stormy heart-beating ending: 
"So fall you down in prostration to All?  and worship Him (Alone)." [Al-Qur'an 53:62] 
The idolaters, unconsciously and with full compliance, prostrated themselves in 
absolute god-fearing and stainless devotion. It was in fact the wonderful moment of 
the Truth that cleaved through the obdurate souls of the haughty and the attitude of 
the scoffers. They stood aghast when they perceived that All? ’s Words had 
conquered their hearts and done the same thing that they had been trying hard to 
annihilate and exterminate. Their co-polytheists who had not been present on the 
scene reproached and blamed them severely; consequently they began to fabricate 
lies and calumniate the Prophet [pbuh] alleging that he had attached to their idols 
great veneration and ascribed to them the power of desirable intercession. All of 
these were desperate attempts made to establish an excusable justification for their 
prostrating themselves with the Prophet [pbuh] on that day. Of course, this foolish 
and iniquitous slanderous behaviour was in line with their life-consecrated practice of 
telling lies and plot hatching. 

65
News of this incident was misreported to the Muslim emigrants in Abyssinia 
(Ethiopia). They were informed that the whole of Quraish had embraced Islam so 
they made their way back home. They arrived in Makkah in Shawwal of the same 
year. When they were only an hour’s travel from Makkah, the reality of the situation 
was discovered. Some of them returned to Abyssinia (Ethiopia), others sneaked 
secretly into the city or went in publicly but under the tutelage of a local notable. 
However, due to the news that transpired to the Makkans about the good hospitality 
and warm welcome that the Muslims were accorded in Abyssinia (Ethiopia), the 
polytheists got terribly indignant and started to mete out severer and more horrible 
maltreatment and tortures to the Muslims. Thereupon the Messenger of All?  [pbuh] 
deemed it imperative to permit the helpless creatures to seek asylum in Abyssinia 
(Ethiopia) for the second time. Migration this time was not as easy as it was the 
previous time, for Quraish was on the alert to the least suspicious moves of the 
Muslims. In due course, however, the Muslims managed their affairs too fast for the 
Quraishites to thwart their attempt of escape. The group of emigrants this time 
comprised eighty three men and ninet