Pre-Badr Missions and Invasions 
With a view to implementing these plans, the Muslims commenced real military 
activities, which at first took the form of reconnaissance patrols delegated to explore 
the geopolitical features of the roads surrounding Madinah and others leading to 
Makkah, and building alliances with the tribes nearby. The Prophet wanted to 
impress upon the polytheists and Jews of Madinah as well as the bedouins in its 
vicinity, that the Muslims had smashed their old fears, and had been too strong to be 
attacked with impunity. He also wanted to display the power of his followers in order 
to deter Quraish from committing any military folly against him which might 

127
jeopardize their economic life and means of living, and to stop them from 
persecuting the helpless Muslims detained in Makkah, consequently he would avail 
himself of this opportunity and resume his job of propagating the Divine Call freely. 
The following is a resume of these missions and errands: 
1. Saif Al-Bahr Platoon sent in Ramadan 1 A.H., i.e. 623 A.D. led by Hamzah bin 
‘Abdul Muttalib and comprising 30 Emigrants with a definite task of 
intercepting a caravan belonging to Quraish. It was a caravan of 300 people 
including Abu Jahl bin Hisham. The two parties encountered each other and 
aligned in preparation for fighting. Majdi bin ‘Amr, on good terms with both 
sides, happened to be there and managed to prevent an imminent clash.  
On that occasion, the Prophet [pbuh] accredited the first flag in the history of 
Muslims. It was white in colour and was entrusted to Kinaz bin Husain Al-
Ghanawi, to carry. 
2. In Shawwal, 1 A.H., i.e. April 623 A.D. The Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] 
despatched ‘Ubaidah bin Al-Harith bin Al-Muttalib at the head of 60 horsemen 
of Emigrants to a spot called Batn Rabegh where they encountered Abu 
Sufyan at the head of a caravan of 200 men. There was arrow shooting but 
no actual fighting.  
It is interesting to note that two Muslims, Al-Miqdad bin ‘Amr Al-Bahrani and 
‘Utbah bin Ghazwan Al-Mazini, defected from the caravan of Quraish and 
joined the ranks of ‘Ubaidah. The Muslims had a white flag carried by Mistah 
bin Athatha bin Al-Muttalib bin ‘Abd Munaf. 
3. In Dhul Qa‘dah 1 A.H., i.e. May 623 A.D. the Prophet [pbuh] despatched Sa‘d 
bin Abi Waqqas at the head of 20 horsemen, and instructed them not to go 
beyond Al-Kharrar. After a five-day march they reached the spot to discover 
that the camels of Quraish had left the day before; their flag, as usual, was 
white and carried by Al-Miqdad bin ‘Amr. 
4. Ghazwa Al-Abwa’ or Waddan. It was in Safar 2 A.H., i.e. 623 A.D. The 
Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] set out himself at the head of 70 men, mostly 
Emigrants, to intercept a camel caravan belonging to Quraish, leaving behind 
Sa‘d bin ‘Ubadah to dispose the affairs in Madinah. When he reached Waddan, 
a place between Makkah and Madinah, he found none.  
In the process of this campaign, he contracted a non-aggression pact with 
‘Amr bin Makhshi Ad-Damari. The provisions of the pact go as follows: 
"This is a document from Muhammad, the Messenger of Allâh concerning Bani 
Damrah in which he established them safe and secure in their wealth and 
lives. They can expect support from the Muslims unless they oppose the 
religion of Allâh. They are also expected to respond positively in case the 
Prophet sought their help