of Badr in its Qur’ânic Context 
The Chapter of Al-Anfal (spoils of war) was revealed on the occasion of the battle of 
Badr, Ramadan 17th 2 A.H. It constituted a unique Divine commentary on this 
battle. 
Allâh, the All-High, in the context of this Chapter draws on major issues relating to 
the whole process of Islamization. Allâh, here draws the attention of the Muslims to 
the still lingering moral shortcomings in their character. He wants them to build an 
integrated, purified society. He speaks about the invisible assistance he sent down to 
His obedient servants to enable them to accomplish their noble objectives. He wants 
the Muslims to rid themselves of any trait of haughtiness or arrogance that might 
sneak in. He wants them to turn to Him for help, obey Him and His Messenger 
[pbuh]. 
After that He delineated the noble objectives for which the Messenger [pbuh] 
launched that bloody battle, and directed them to the merits and qualities that 
brought about the great victory. 
The polytheists, hypocrites, the Jews and prisoners of war were also mentioned, 
being admonished to surrender to the Truth and adhere to it only. 

146
The question of the spoils of war was resolved and the principles and basics relevant 
to this issue were clearly defined. 
The laws and rules pertinent to war and peace were legalized and codified, especially 
at this advanced stage of the Islamic action. Allâh wanted the Muslims to follow war 
ethics dissimilar to those of pre-Islamic practices. The Muslims are deemed to outdo 
the others in ethics, values and fine ideals. He wants to impress on the world that 
Islam is not merely a theoretical code of life, it is rather mind cultivation-orientated 
practical principles. In this context, He established inter and intra-state relations. 
The fast of Ramadan was established as an obligatory observance in the year 2 A.H., 
appended by the duty imposed upon Muslims of paying Zakat (alms tax, poor-due) in 
order to alleviate the burden of the needy Emigrants. 
A wonderful and striking coincidence was the establishment of Shawwal ‘Eid (the 
Festival of the Fast-Breaking) directly after the manifest victory of Badr. It was 
actually the finest spectacle ever witnessed of Muslims leaving their houses praying, 
acclaiming Allâh’s Name and entertaining His praise at the top of their voices in 
recognition of His favour and grace, and last but not least, the support He rendered 
them and through which the forces of the Truth overpowered those of evil. 
"And remembe