Hisham 1/111] 
The political role of the ‘Adnanides had begun to gain firmer grounds in Makkah, 
which could be clearly attested by the fact that upon Bukhtanassar’s first invasion of 
the Arabs in ‘Dhati ‘Irq’, the leader of the Arabs was not from Jurhum. [Qalb Jazeerat 
Al-Arab, p.230] 
Upon Bukhtanassar’s second invasion in 587 B.C., however, the ‘Adnanides were 
frightened out to Yemen, while Burmia An-Nabi fled to Syria with Ma‘ad, but when 
Bukhtanassar’s pressure lessened, Ma‘ad returned to Makkah to find none of the 
tribe of Jurhum except Jursham bin Jalhamah, whose daughter, Mu‘ana, was given to 
Ma‘ad as wife who, later, had a son by him named Nizar. [Rahmat-ul-lil'alameen, 
2/48] 
On account of difficult living conditions and destitution prevalent in Makkah, the tribe 
of Jurhum began to ill-treat visitors of the Holy Sanctuary and extort its funds, which 
aroused resentment and hatred of the ‘Adnanides (sons of Bakr bin ‘Abd Munaf bin 
Kinana) who, with the help of the tribe of Khuza‘a that had come to settle in a 
neighbouring area called Marr Az-Zahran, invaded Jurhum and frightened them out 
of Makkah leaving rulership to Quda‘a in the middle of the second century A.D. 
Upon leaving Makkah, Jurhum filled up the well of Zamzam, levelled its place and 
buried a great many things in it. ‘Amr bin Al-Harith bin Mudad Al-Jurhumi was 
reported by Ibn Ishaq, the well-known historian, to have buried the two gold deer 
together with the Black Stone as well as a lot of jewelry and swords in Zamzam, 
prior to their sorrowful escape to Yemen. [Ibn Hisham 1/114,115] 
Ishmael’s epoch is estimated to have lasted for twenty centuries B.C., which means 
that Jurhum stayed in Makkah for twenty-one centuries and held rulership there for 
about twenty centuries. 
Upon defeat of Jurhum, the tribe of Khuza‘a monopolized rulership over Makkah. 
Mudar tribes, however, enjoyed three privileges:  
The First: Leading pilgrims from ‘Arafat to Muzdalifah and then from Mina to the 
‘Aqabah Stoning Pillar. This was the authority of the family of Al-Ghawth bin Murra, 
one of the septs of Elias bin Mudar, who were called ‘Sofa’. This privilege meant that 
the pilgrims were not allowed to throw stones at Al-‘Aqabah until one of the ‘Sofa’ 

18
men did that. When they had finished stoning and wanted to leave the valley of 
Mina, ‘Sofa’ men stood on the two sides of Al-‘Aqabah and nobody would pass that 
position until the men of ‘Sofa’ passed and cleared the way for the pilgrims. When 
Sofa perished, the family of Sa‘d bin Zaid Manat from Tamim tribe took over.  
The Second: Al-Ifadah (leaving for Mina after Muzdalifah) on sacrifice morning, and 
this was the responsibility of the family o