i 1/475] 
Another Yemeni tribe – Jurhum the Second – came and lived in Makkah upon Hagar’s 
permission, after being said to have lived in the valleys around Makkah. It is 
mentioned in the Sahih Al-Bukhari that this tribe came to Makkah before Ishmael 
was a young man while they had passed through that valley long before this event. 
Abraham used to go to Makkah every now and then to see his wife and son. The 
number of these journeys is still unknown, but authentic historical resources spoke of 
four ones. 
All? , the Sublime, stated in the Noble Qur’?  that He had Abraham see, in his 
dream, that he slaughtered his son Ishmael, and therefore Abraham stood up to 
fulfill His Order:  
"Then, when they had both submitted themselves (to the Will of All? ), and 
he had laid him prostrate on his forehead (or on the side of his forehead for 
slaughtering); and We called out to him: "O Abraham! You have fulfilled the 
dream (vision)!" Verily! Thus do we reward the Muhsin?  (good-doers, who 
perform good deeds totally for All? ’s sake only, without any show off or to 
gain praise or fame, etc. and do them in accordance to All? ’s Orders). 
Verily, that indeed was a manifest trial — and We ransomed him with a 
great sacrifice (i.e. a ram)" [37:103-107] 
It is mentioned in the Genesis that Ishmael was thirteen years older than his brother 
Ishaq. The sequence of the story of the sacrifice of Ishmael shows that it really 
happened before Ishaq’s birth, and that All? ’s Promise to give Abraham another son, 
Ishaq, came after narration of the whole story. 
This story spoke of one journey – at least – before Ishmael became a young man. 
Al-Bukhari, on the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas, reported the other three journeys; a 
summary of which goes as follows: 
When Ishmael became a young man, he learned Arabic at the hand of the tribe of 
Jurhum, who loved him with great admiration and gave him one of their women as a 
wife, soon after his mother died. Having wanted to see his wife and son again, 

11
Abraham came to Makkah, after Ishmael’s marriage, but he didn’t find him at home. 
He asked Ishmael’s wife about her husband and how they were doing. She 
complained of poverty, so he asked her to tell Ishmael to change his doorstep. 
Ishmael understood the message, divorced his wife and got married to the daughter 
of Mudad bin ‘Amr, chief of the tribe of Jurhum. [Qalb Jazeerat Al-Arab, p 230] 
Once more, Abraham came to see his son, but again didn’t find him at home. He 
asked his new wife the same previous question, to which she thanked All? . Abraham 
asked her to tell Ishmael to keep his doorstep (i.e. to keep her as wife) and went 
back to Palestine. 
A third time, Abraham came to Makkah to find Ishmael sharpening an arrow under a 
lofty tree near Zamzam. The meeting, after a very long journey of separation, was 
very touching for a father so affectionate and a so dutiful and righteous son. This 
time, father and son built Al-Ka‘bah and raised its pillars, and Abraham, in 
compliance with All? ’s Commandment, called unto people to make pilgrimage to