lst the brunt of the battle centred around the standard, bitter fighting was going 
on everywhere on the battlefield. The spirit of Faith overwhelmed the Muslims’ 
ranks; so they rushed among the idolaters as if they had been an outbreak of a 
destructive flood that overflowed and knocked down all dams and barriers standing 
in its way "I seek death, I seek death." That was their announced motto on Uhud 
Day. 
Abu Dujana, recognized by the red band worn round his head, came forth, fighting 
with the sword of the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh]. He was determined to pay its price 
at all costs. He killed all the idolaters that stood on his way splitting and dispersing 
their ranks. Az-Zubair bin Al-‘Awwam said: 
"I felt angry and discouraged when the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] refused to give me 
the sword but gave it to Abu Dujana. I said to myself: ‘I am his paternal cousin — 
the cousin of his aunt Safiya — a Quraishite, besides, I was the first who demanded 
it and yet he favoured him to me. By Allâh, I will watch how he will use it.’ So I 

165
followed him, I saw him take out his red band and wear it round his head. Seeing 
him like that, the Helpers said, ‘Abu Dujana had worn the band of death.’ Then he 
set out saying loudly: 
‘I am the one whom my intimate friend made covenant with, when we were under 
the palm-trees on the mountain side. 
The covenant that we made was that I should not fight at the rear. 
But fight at the front heroically with the sword of Allâh and His Messenger.’ 
No one stood the way of Abu Dujana but was killed. There was a man among the 
idolaters whose only target was to finish off the wounded Muslims. During the fight 
Abu Dujana drew near that man; so I implored Allâh that they might engage in 
combat. They in fact did and exchanged two sword-strokes. The idolater struck Abu 
Dujana, but he escaped it and it pierced into his leather shield. The idolater’s sword 
now stuck to it, Abu Dujana struck him with the sword and killed him. Ibn Hisham 2/68,69] 
Into the thick of the battle, he rushed to kill a person who was inciting the enemy to 
fight the Muslims. Upon this the person shrieked and lo! it was a woman. Abu Dujana 
spared her saying: ‘I res