Some details pertinent to the successive stages of Revelation 
Before we go into the details of the period of communicating the Message and 
Prophethood, we would like to get acquainted with the stages of the Revelation 
which constituted the main source of the Message and the subject-matter of the Call. 
Ibn Al-Qayyim, mentioning the stages of the Revelation, said:  
The First: The period of true vision. It was the starting point of the Revelation to the 
Messenger of All?  [pbuh].  
The Second: What the angel invisibly cast in the Prophet’s mind and heart. The 
Messenger of All?  [pbuh] said: "The Noble Spirit revealed to me ‘No soul will perish 
until it exhausts its due course, so fear All?  and gently request Him. Never get so 
impatient to the verge of disobedience of All? . What All?  has can never be acquired 
but through obedience to Him.’" 
The Third: The angel used to visit the Messenger of All?  [pbuh] in the form of a 
human being and would speak to him directly. This would enable him to fully 
understand what the angel said. The angel was sometimes seen in this form by the 
Prophet’s Companions. 
The Fourth: The angel came to him like the toll of a bell and this was the most 
difficult form because the angel used to seize him tightly and sweat would stream 
from his forehead even on the coldest day. If the Prophet [pbuh] was on his camel, 
the camel would not withstand the weight, so it would immediately kneel down on 
the ground. Once the Messenger of All?  [pbuh] had such a revelation when he was 
sitting and his thigh was on Zaid’s, Zaid felt the pressure had almost injured his 
thigh. 

46
The Fifth: The Prophet [pbuh] saw the angel in his actual form. The angel would 
reveal to him what All?  had ordered him to reveal. This, as mentioned in (Qur’? ), in 
S? ah An-Najm (Chapter 53 - The Star), happened twice. 
The Sixth: What All?  Himself revealed to him in heaven i.e. when he ascended to 
heaven and received All? ’s behest of Sal?  (prayer). 
The Seventh: All? ’s Words to His Messenger [pbuh] at first hand without the 
mediation of an angel. It was a privilege granted to Moses ? ?
 
??? and clearly 
attested in the Qur’? , as it is attested to our Prophet [pbuh] in the S? ah Al-
Isr?#146; (Chapter 17 - The Journey by Night) of the Noble Qur’? .  
Some religious scholars added a controversial eighth stage in which they state that 
All?  spoke to the Prophet [pbuh] directly without a curtain in between. T