econd Part of Khaibar conquered 
When the Prophet [pbuh], along with his army, moved to this part of Khaibar, Al-
Katiba, he laid a heavy siege to it for fourteen days with the Jews barricading 
themselves inside their forts. When he was about to use the rams, the Jews realized 
that they would perish, therefore, they asked for a negotiable peace treaty. 
There is one controversial point in this context. Was this part of Khaibar (with its 
three forts) conquered by force? Ibn Ishaq clearly stated that Al-Qamus fort was 
conquered by force. Al-Waqidi, on the other hand, maintained that the three forts 
were taken through peace negotiations, and force, if any, was resorted to only to 
hand the fort over to the Muslims; the two other forts surrendered without fighting. 

237
 
Negotiations 
Ibn Abi Al-Huqaiq was despatched to the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] to negotiate the 
surrender treaty. The Prophet [pbuh] agreed to spare their lives on condition they 
evacuate Khaibar and the adjacent land, leaving whatever gold and silver they had in 
their possession. However, he stipulated that he would disavow any commitment if 
they concealed anything. Shortly afterwards, the forts were handed over to the 
Muslims and all Khaibar was reduced and brought under the sway of Islam. 
This treaty notwithstanding, Abi Al-Huqaiq’s two sons concealed a leather bag full of 
jewels, and money belonging to Huyai bin Al-Akhtab, who carried it with him when 
Banu Nadir had been banished. Kinanah bin Ar-Rabi‘, who had hidden the musk 
somewhere, was obdurate in his denial and so he was killed when the musk was 
discovered and his dishonesty was proven. Abi Al-Huqaiq’s two sons were killed in 
recompense for breaching the covenant, and Safiyah, Huyai’s daughter was taken as 
a captive.  
Distribution of Spoils 
In accordance with the agreement already concluded, the Jews would be obliged to 
evacuate Khaibar, but they were anxious to keep on cultivating the rich soil and fine 
orchard for which Khaibar was famous. They, therefore, approached the Prophet 
[pbuh] with the request that they be allowed to cultivate their lands and they would 
give half of the produce to the Muslims. Muhammad [pbuh] was kind enough to 
accede to their request. 
The Messenger [pbuh] divided the land of Khaibar into two: one half to provide the 
food to be stored in case of any accidental calamity that might befall the Muslims, 
and for entertaining the foreign delegates who started to frequent Madinah a lot; the 
other half would go to the Muslims who had witnessed Al-Hudaibiyah event whether 
present or absent. The total number of shares came to 36, of which 18 were given to 
the people above-mentioned. The army consisted of 1400 men of whom were 200 
horsemen. The horseman was allotted 3 shares and the footman one. [Za'd Al-Ma'ad 2/137, 
138] 
The spoils taken at Khaibar were so great that Ibn ‘Umar said: "We never ate our fill 
until we had conquered Khaibar." ‘Aishah [R] is narrated to have said: "Now we can 
eat our fill of dates." [Sahih Al-Bukhari 2/609] 
On their return to Madinah, the Emigrants were able to return to the Helpers of 
Madinah all the gifts they had received. All of this affluence came after the conquest 
of Khaibar and the great economic benefits that the Muslims began to reap. [Za'd Al-
Ma'ad 2/148; Sahih Muslim 2/96] 
The conquest of Khaibar coincided with the arrival of the Prophet’s cousin Ja‘far bin 
Abi Talib and his companions along with Abi Musa Al-Ash‘ari and some Muslims from 
Abyssinia (Ethiopia). 
Abu Musa Al-Ash‘ari narrated that he and over fifty companions, while in Yemen, 
took a ship which landed them in Abyssinia (Ethiopia) and they happened to meet 
there Ja‘far and his companions. He said, "We stayed together until the Prophet 
[pbuh] sent an envoy asking us to come back. When we returned, we found out 

238
that he had already conquered Khaibar, yet he gave us our due shares of the spoils." 
The advent of those men came at the request made by the Messenger of Allâh 
[pbuh] to Negus, king of Abyssinia (Ethiopia), through a Prophetic deputy, ‘Amr bin 
Omaiya Ad-Damari. Negus sent them back, 16 men altogether with their wives and 
children on two boats. The rest of emigrants had arrived in Madinah earlier. 
[Muhadarat Tareekh Al-Umam Al-Islamiyah 1/128]  
In the same context, Safiyah, whose husband Kinanah bin Abi Al-Huqaiq was killed 
for treachery, was taken as a captive and brought along with other prisoners of war. 
After the permission of the Prophet [pbuh] was sought, Dihyah Al-Kalbi chose one of 
them and she happened to be Safiyah. The other Muslims, however, advised that 
Safiyah, being the daughter of the chief of Bani Quraiza and Bani Nadir, should be 
married to the Prophet [pbuh], who agreed to their opinion, invited her to Islam, 
freed and took her as wife on her embracing Islam. The wedding feast consisted of 
dates and fat, and was held on his way back to Madinah at a spot called Sadd As-
Sahba’. 
After the conquest of Khaibar, a Jewish woman called Zainab bint Al-Harith offered 
the Prophet [pbuh] a roasted sheep she had poisoned. He took a mouthful, but it 
was not to his liking so he spat it out. After investigation, the woman confessed that 
she had stuffed the food with poison alleging that if the eater were a king, she would 
then rid herself of him, but should he be a Prophet, then he would be bound to learn 
about it. The Prophet [