285
People embrace the Religion of Allâh in Large Crowds 
The invasion and the conquest of Makkah was — as we have already stated — a 
decisive battle that destroyed paganism utterly. The Arabs as a result of that battle 
were able to differentiate the truth from the error. Delusion no longer existed in their 
life. So they raced to embrace Islam. ‘Amr bin Salamah said: "We were at a water 
(spring) where the passage of people was. So when camel riders passed by us we 
used to ask them: ‘What is the matter with people? What is this man (i.e. the 
Prophet) like?’ They would say, ‘He claims that Allâh has revealed so and so.’ I used 
to memorize those words as if they had been recited within my chest. The Arabs 
used to ascribe their Islamization to the conquest. They would say: ‘Leave him alone 
to face his people. If he were a truthful Prophet he would overcome them.’ So when 
the conquest took place, peoples hastened to declare their Islam. My father was the 
quickest of all my people to embrace Islam. Arriving at his people he said: ‘By Allâh I 
have just verily been to the Prophet [pbuh]. And he said: ‘Perform so a prayer at 
such a time, and so and so prayers at such and such time. When the prayer time is 
due let one of you call for the prayer and appoint the most learned of the Qur’ân 
among you to be an Imam (leader) of yours. [Sahih Al-Bukhari 2/615,616]" This 
Prophetic tradition manifests the great effect of the conquest of Makkah on the phase 
of events. It certainly shows the influence of the conquest of Makkah upon the 
consolidation of Islam as well as on the Arabs’ stand and their surrender to Islam. 
That influence was absolutely confirmed and deeply rooted after the invasion of 
Tabuk. A clear and an obvious evidence of that influence could be deduced from the 
great number of delegations arriving in Madinah successively in the ninth and tenth 
years of Al-Hijra. The immense crowds of people who raced to embrace the religion 
of Allâh and the great army which included ten thousand fighters in the invasion of 
the conquest of Makkah had grown big enough to include thirty thousand fighters 
sharing in Tabuk invasion. It was only in less than a year after the conquest of 
Makkah that this growth in Islamic army had taken place. A hundred thousand or a 
hundred and forty four thousand Muslim pilgrims shared in Hajjatul -Wada‘ (i.e. 
Farewell Pilgrimage); it was such an enormous number of Muslims surging — as an 
ocean