. 
The Nabeteans – sons of Nabet – established a flourishing civilization in the north of 
Hijaz, they instituted a powerful government which spread out its domain over all 
neighbouring tribes, and made Petra their capital. Nobody dared challenge their 
authority until the Romans came and managed to eliminate their kingdom. After 
extensive research and painstaking investigation, Mr. Sulaiman An-Nadwi came to 
the conclusion that the Ghassanide kings, along with the Aws and Khazraj were not 
likely to be Qahtanians but rather Nabeteans. [Tareekh Ard Al-Qur'an 2/78-86] 
Descendants of Qidar, the son of Ishmael, lived long in Makkah increasing in 
number, of them issued ‘Adnan and son Ma‘ad, to whom ‘Adnanian Arabs traced 
back their ancestry. ‘Adnan is the twenty-first grandfather in the series of the 
Prophetic ancestry. It was said that whenever Prophet Muhammad [pbuh] spoke of 
his ancestry he would stop at ‘Adnan and say: "Genealogists tell lies" and did not go 
farther than him. A group of scholars, however, favoured the probability of going 
beyond ‘Adnan attaching no significance to the aforementioned Prophetic Hadith. 
They went on to say that there were exactly forty fathers between ‘Adnan and 
Abraham [AWS]. [Rahmat-ul-lil'alameen 2/7-17] 
Nizar, Ma‘ad’s only son , had four sons who branched out into four great tribes; 
Eyad, Anmar, Rabi‘a and Mudar. These last two sub-branched into several septs. 
Rabi‘a fathered Asad, ‘Anazah, ‘Abdul Qais, and Wa’il’s two sons (Bakr and Taghlib), 
Hanifa and many others. 
Mudar tribes branched out into two great divisions: Qais ‘Ailan bin Mudar and septs 
of Elias bin Mudar. Of Qais ‘Ailan were the Banu Saleem, Banu Hawazin, and Banu 
Ghatafan of whom descended ‘Abs, Zubyan, Ashja‘ and Ghani bin A‘sur. Of Elias bin 
Mudar were Tamim bin Murra, Hudhail bin Mudrika, Banu Asad bin Khuzaimah and 

12
septs of Kinana bin Khuzaimah, of whom came Quraish, the descendants of Fahr bin 
Malik bin An-Nadr bin Kinana. 
Quraish branched out into various tribes, the most famous of whom were Jumah, 
Sahm, ‘Adi, Makhzum, Tayim, Zahra and the three septs of Qusai bin Kilab: ‘Abdud-
Dar bin Qusai, Asad bin ‘Abdul ‘Uzza bin Qusai and ‘Abd Manaf bin Qusai. 
‘Abd Manaf branched out into four tribes: ‘Abd Shams, Nawfal, Muttalib and Hashim. 
It is, however, from the family of Hashim that All?  selected Prophet Muhammad bin 
‘Abdullah bin ‘Abdul-Muttalib bin Hashim [pbuh]. 
Prophet Muhammad [pbuh] said:  
"All?  selected Ishmael from the sons of Abraham, Kinana from the sons of 
Ishmael, Quraish from the sons of Kinana, Hashim from the sons of Quraish 
and He selected me from the sons of Hashim." [Muslim 2/245; Tirmidhi 2/201] 
Al-‘Abbas bin ‘Abdul-Muttalib quoted the Messenger of All?  [pbuh] as saying:  
"All?  created mankind and chose me from the best whereof, He chose the 
tribes and selected me from the best whereof; and He chose families and 
selected me from the best whereof. I