senger of Allâh [pbuh] was then among a small group of fighters — nine in 
number at the rear of the army[Sahih Muslim 2/107], watching the engagement and braving 
the Muslim fighters. Khalid and his men took him by utter surprise, and obliged him 
to follow either of two options: 
a. To flee for his life and abandon his army to its doomed end, or 
b. To take action at the risk of his life, rally the ranks of the Muslims again and 
work their way through the hills of Uhud towards the encompassed army.  

168
The genius of the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh], his peerless and matchless courage 
made him opt for the second course. He raised his voice calling out unto his 
Companions: "Slaves of Allâh." He did that though he knew that his loud voice would 
be heard by the idolaters before it was heard by the Muslims. He called out unto 
them risking his life in this delicate situation. 
The idolaters, indeed, recognized him and reached his position even before the other 
Muslims could do so. 
The encompassment of the Muslims revealed three categories of people: The first 
group were those who were only interested in themselves and they went so mad that 
they fled. They left the battlefield and did not know what happened to the others. 
Some of this group fled as far as Madinah. Some others went up the mountain. 
The second Muslim group were those who returned to the battle, but mixed with the 
idolaters in such a way that they could not recognize one another. Consequently 
some of them were killed by mistake. On the authority of Al-Bukhari, he states that 
‘Aishah [R] said: "When it was Uhud Battle, the idolaters were utterly defeated. 
Satan then called out: ‘O slaves of Allâh. Beware the rear (i.e. the enemy is 
approaching from behind)’. So those who were at the front turned back and fought 
the ones who were behind." 
Then Hudhaifah caught sight of his father ‘Al-Yaman’ about to be killed by other 
Muslims. So he said: "O servants of Allâh! Beware! This is my father. This is my 
father." ‘Aishah [R] said: "But they did not part with him till he was killed." 
Hudhaifah then said: "May Allâh forgive you." And ‘Urwa said: "By Allâh, from that 
time on Hudhaifah has always been blessed and wealthy till he died."[Sahih Al-Bukhari 1/539, 
2/581; Fath Al-Bari 7/351, 362, 363] That was because he forgave them and refused to take any 
blood-money for his father’s murder but recommended that it be spent in charity. 
This Muslim group suffered from great bewilderment, and disorder prevailed among 
them. A lot of them got lost and did not know where to go. At this awkward time 
they heard someone calling: "Muhammad is killed." This news made them even more 
bewildered and almost out of sense. Their morale broke down, or almost did in a 
great number of individuals. Some of them stopped fighting, slackened, and cast 
down their weapons. Others thought of getting in touch with ‘Abdullah bin Ubai — 
the head of the hypocrites — and seeking his assistance to fetch them a security 
pledge from Abu Sufyan. 
Anas bin An-Nadr passed by those people who were shuddering of fear and panic, 
and inquired: "What are you waiting for?" They said: "The Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] 
has been killed." "What do you live for after Muhammad [pbuh]? Come on and die 
for what the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] has died for." Then he said: "O Allâh I 
apologize for what these people (i.e. the Muslims) have done; and I swear disavowal 
of what the idolaters have perpetrated." Then he moved on till he was encountered 
by Sa‘d bin Mu‘adh who asked him: "Where to, Abu ‘Umar?" Anas replied: "Ah, how 
fine the scent of the Paradise is! I smell it here in Uhud." He went on and fought 
against the idolaters till he was killed. Nobody but his sister could recognize his dead 
body. It had been cut and stabbed by over eighty swords, arrows or spears. It was 
by the tip of his finger that she — after the battle — recognized him.[Za'd Al Ma'ad 2/93, 96; 
Sahih Al-Bukhari 2/579] 

169
Thabit bin Ad-Dahdah called unto his people saying: 
"O kinfolk of Helpers, if Muhammad [pbuh] were killed, Allâh is Everlasting and He 
never dies. Fight in defence of your Faith. Allâh will help you and so you will be 
victorious." A group of Helpers joined him and all set out and attacked a battalion of 
Khalid’s horsemen. He kept on fighting till he and his friends were killed.[Ibn Hisham 2/81] 
An Emigrant passed by a Helper who was besmeared by blood. He said: "O fellow! 
Have you heard of Muhammad [pbuh]’s murder?" The Helper answered: "If 
Muhammad [pbuh] were killed, then he must have completed the delivery of the 
Message. So fight in defence of your religion!"[Za'd Al Ma'ad 2/96] 
With such boldness and encouragement, the Muslims soon recovered their spirits, 
came round to senses and desisted the idea of surrender or contacting the hypocrite 
‘Abdullah bin Ubai. They took up arms and resumed the fight attempting to make 
way to the headquarters, particularly after the news of the Prophet [pbuh]’s death 
had been falsified. The glad tidings nerved them, and helped them to manage quite 
successfully the break of the military blockade, and concentrate their forces in an 
immune place to resume a relentless and fierce fight against the polytheists. 
The third group of Muslims were those who cared for nothing except the Prophet 
[pbuh]. At the head of them were notable Companions like Abu Bakr, ‘Umar bin Al-
Khattab, ‘Ali bin Abi Talib and others ÑÖì Çááå Úäåã, who hastened to protect the 
Prophet [pbuh] through unrivalled devotion. 
As those groups of Muslims were receiving the blows of the idolaters and resisting 
instantly, the fight flared up around the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh], who had only 
nine people around him. We have already mentioned that when the idolaters started 
their encompassment there were only nine persons around the Messenger of Allâh 
[pbuh]; and that as soon as he called out unto the Muslims: "Come on! I am the 
Messenger of Allâh [pbuh]," the idolaters heard his voice and recognized him. So 
they turned back and attacked him with all their power before any of his Companions 
ran to his aid. 
A violent raging struggle broke out between the nine Muslims and the idolaters 
during which peerless sort of love, self-sacrifice, bravery and heroism were revealed. 
Muslim, on the authority of Anas bin Malik narrated that the Messenger of Allâh 
[pbuh] along with seven Helpers and two Emigrants, was confined to a trap when the 
idolaters attacked him. The Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] then said: " He who pushes 
back those idolaters, will be housed in Paradise." or "He will be my Companion in 
Paradise." One of the Helpers stepped forward and fought the idolaters in defence of 
the Prophet [pbuh] till he was killed. Then they attacked the Messenger [pbuh] 
again. The same process was repeated again and again till all the seven Helpers 
were killed. Then the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] said to his two Quraishite 
Companions: "We have