free and 
entrusted each one of them to a Muslim to care about their living affairs, which was 
too hard for the castle folkspeople to bear. 
Seeing that the siege lasted too long and that the castle was immune and could 
stand any siege (for they had already stored a supply that suffices for over a year) 
and that the Muslims were suffering — day by day — from arrow-shots and heated 
iron hooks, the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] consulted Nawfal bin Mu‘âwiyah Ad-Daili 
about that. He said: "They are like a fox hiding inside its burrow. If you stoodfast at 
it you would catch it, but if you parted with it, no harm would afflict you." The 
Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] decided to lift the siege and depart. ‘Umar bin Al-Khattab, 
who was ordered by the Prophet to notify people, said to them "If Allâh will, we are 
leaving the castle and going back tomorrow." As it was too hard for the Muslims to 
go back and leave the castle unconquered they complained saying, "Should we go 
away while the castle is still unopened?" His reply was: "Then, start fighting in the 
morning." In the morning they fought and were wounded. So when he repeated this 
statement: "If Allâh will, we are leaving the castle and going back tomorrow", they 
were pleased and carried out the order submissively and started moving, which 
made the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] laugh. 
As soon as they mounted and started moving the Messenger [pbuh] said: 
"Say! Here we are returning, repenting, worshipping (Allâh) and to our Lord 
we offer praise." 
When the Messenger of Allâh was asked to invoke Allâh against Thaqif, he said: 
"O Allâh, guide Thaqif and bring them to us as Muslims."  
The Distribution of the Booty at Al-Ji‘ranah 
Upon returning and lifting the siege in Ta’if, the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] had 
stayed over ten nights at Al-Ji‘ranah before starting to distribute the booty. 
Distribution delay was due to the Prophet’s hope that Hawazin’s delegation might 
arrive and announce their repentance and consequently reclaim their loss. Seeing 
that none of them arrived, he started dividing the booty so as to calm down the 
tribes’ chiefs and the celebrities of Makkah. The first to receive booty and the ones 

264
who obtained the greatest number of shares were the people who had recently 
embraced Islam. 
Abu Sufyan bin Harb was given a hundred camels and forty (gold) ounces and yet he 
said, "What about my son, Yazeed’s Share?" So he was given the same quantity for 
his son as well. But yet he exclaimed: "And what about the share of Mu‘âwiyah, my 
second son?" So the Prophet [pbuh] gave Mu‘âwiyah as much as he gave his father 
and brother. Hakeem bin Hizam was given a hundred camels, but he was given a 
hundred more when he demanded. Safwan bin Omaiyah was given three hundred 
camels - a hundred camels at each time. It is thus mentioned in Shifâ’ [Ash-Shifa 
1/86], Book by Qadi Iyadh. The Prophet [pbuh] gave Al-Harith bin Harith bin Kilda a 
hundred camels. He also gave some chiefs of Quraish and other clans a hundred 
camels; he gave others fifty and some others had forty. 
Eventually it was spread among people that "Muhammad grants generously and 
fears not to grow poor." This made bedouins gather around him expecting to be 
given some wealth. They were so many that they forced the Prophet [pbuh] to seek 
refuge against a tree and they even took away his garment, "O people!" He said, 
"Give me back my garment! For I swear by the One in Whose Hand is Muhammad’s 
soul, that if I had as many numerous camels as the number of Tihama trees, I would 
distribute them among you. You know quite well that I am neither mean nor coward 
or a liar." Standing by his camel he plucked out a hair of his camel’s hump and held 
it between his two fingers, lifted it up and said: "O people, I swear by Allâh that I get 
nothing but one-fifth of your booty, and this very fifth goes back to you." 
As soon as he had given the new converts, the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] ordered 
Zaid bin Thabit to fetch the booty and summon people. Then he ordained shares to 
people. A footman’s share was four camels and forty sheep, and a horseman would 
take twelve camels and a hundred and twenty sheep. This distribution of booty was 
based on a wise policy. In this world there are lots of people who know the truth only 
when it comes through their stomachs and they do not recognize it if it comes 
through their brains. The similitude of such people is as the guidance of an animal to 
its herd by means of a bunch of clover held at a constant distance off its mouth. The 
animal would try all the time to catch it, so it would eventually go into the herd 
safely. In the same way you have