Rapid Review of Muhammad’s Biography before Commissioning of the 
Prophethood 
Prophet Muhammad [pbuh] was, in his youth, a combination of the best social 
attributes. He was an exemplary man of weighty mind and faultless insight. He was 
favoured with intelligence, originality of thought and accurate choice of the means 
leading to accurate goals. His long silence helped favourably in his habit of 

43
meditation and deep investigation into the truth. His vivid mind and pure nature 
were helpfully instrumental in assimilating and comprehending ways of life and 
people, individual and community-wise. He shunned superstitious practices but took 
an active part in constructive and useful dealings, otherwise, he would have recourse 
to his self-consecrated solitude. He kept himself aloof from drinking wine, eating 
meat slaughtered on stone altars, or attending idolatrous festivals. He held the idols 
in extreme aversion and most abhorrence. He could never tolerate someone 
swearing by Al-Lat and Al-‘Uzza. All? ’s providence, no doubts, detached him from all 
abominable or evil practices. Even when he tried to obey his instinct to enjoy some 
life pleasures or follow some irrespectable traditions, All? ’s providence intervened to 
curb any lapse in this course. Ibn Al-Atheer reported Muhammad [pbuh] as saying: 
"I have never tried to do what my people do except for two times. Every time All?
 
intervened and checked me from doing so and I never did that again. Once I told my 
fellow-shepherd to take care of my sheep when we were in the upper part of 
Makkah. I wanted to go down to Makkah and entertain myself as the young men did. 
I went down to the first house of Makkah where I heard music. I entered and asked: 
‘What is this?’ Someone answered: ‘It is a wedding party.’ I sat down and listened 
but soon went into deep sleep. I was awakened by the heat of the sun. I went back 
to my fellow-shepherd and told him of what had happened to me. I have never tried 
it again." 
Al-Bukhari reported on the authority of Jabir bin ‘Abdullah that he said: "While the 
people were rebuilding Al-Ka‘bah, the Prophet Muhammad [pbuh] went with ‘Abbas 
to carry some stones. ‘Abbas said: ‘Put your loincloth round your neck to protect you 
from the stones.’ (As he did that) the Prophet [pbuh] fell to the ground and his eyes 
turned skyward. Later on he woke up and shouted: ‘My loincloth... my loincloth.’ He 
wrapped himself in his loincloth." In another report: "His loins were never seen 
afterwards." [Bukhari Chapter: The Building of Al-Ka'bah, 1/540] 
The authorities agree in ascribing to the youth of Muhammad [pbuh] modesty of 
deportment, virtuous behaviour and graceful manners. He proved himself to be the 
ideal of manhood, and to possess a spotless character. He was the most obliging to 
his compatriots, the most honest in his talk and the mildest in temper. He was the 
most gentle-hearted, chaste, hospitable and always impressed people by his piety-
inspiring countenance. He was the most truthful and the best to keep covenant. His 
fellow-citizens, by common consent, gave him the title of Al-‘Ameen (trustworthy). 
The Mother of believers, Khadijah [R], once said: He unites uterine relations, he 
helps the poor and the needy, he entertains the guests and endures hardships in the 
path of truth