and, every attempt was made to grant pardon to the people. ‘Ikrimah 
bin Abu Jahl, who had attacked Khalid’s detachment at the time of the entry into 
Makkah, was forgiven. To Wahshi, the murderer of Hamzah, the Prophet’s uncle, and 
to Hind, who had chewed his liver, was also extended his generous clemency. The 

255
same generous treatment was accorded to Habar who had attacked the Prophet’s 
daughter with a spear, while on her way from Makkah to Madinah, so grievously that 
she ultimately died of the fatal injuries. 
In the same context of magnanimity peculiar to Muhammad [pbuh], two chiefs of 
Quraish were pardoned once they had embraced Islam. They were Safwan bin 
Omaiyah and Fudalah bin ‘Umair. The latter had attempted to assassinate the 
Prophet [pbuh] while circumambulating in the Holy Sanctuary. The Prophet’s 
matchless tolerance and broad-mindedness instigated by his mission as ‘A mercy to 
all people’, converted a terrible hypocrite into a faithful devout believer. 
On the second day of the great conquest, the Prophet [pbuh] stood up and 
addressed the people in matters relating to the holy status of Makkah. After 
entertaining Allâh’s praise, he proclaimed that Makkah was a holy land and would 
remain so till the Day of Judgement. No bloodshed was allowed therein. Should 
anyone take the liberty of fighting within Makkah on grounds derived from the 
events that characterized the conquest, he should remember that it had been a 
licence granted temporarily to the Prophet, and virtually does not go for others. Ibn 
‘Abbas [R] narrated: The Prophet [pbuh] said: "Allâh has made Makkah, a sanctuary, 
so it was a sanctuary before me and will continue to be a sanctuary after me. It was 
made legal for me (i.e. I was allowed to fight in it) for a few hours of a day. It is not 
allowed to uproot its shrubs or to cut its trees, or to chase (or disturb) its game, or 
to pick up its fallen things except by a person who would announce that (what has 
found) publicly." Al-‘Abbas said: "O Allâh’s Messenger! Except the lemon grass (for it 
is used) by our goldsmiths and for our homes." The Prophet [pbuh] then said: 
"Except the lemon grass." 
In this context, out of the spirit of revenge, the tribesmen of Khuza‘ah killed a man 
from Laith Tribe. Here the Prophet was indignant and ordered Khuza‘ah to stop those 
pre-Islamic practices. He, moreover, gave the family of anyone killed the right to 
consider either of two options, blood-money or just retribution (the killer is killed). 
After having delivered his address, the Prophet [pbuh] rode to a small hill, Safa, not 
far from Al-Ka‘bah. Turning his face towards the Sacred House, amidst a vast 
admiring and devotional multitude, he raised his hand in fervent prayer to Allâh. The 
citizens of Madinah who had gathered round him entertained fear, as Allâh had given 
him victory over his native city, he might choose to stay here. He insisted on 
explanation of their fear and so they spoke openly. He immediately dispelled their 
fears and assured them that he had lived with them and would die with them. 
Immediately after the great conquest, the Makkans came to realize that the only way 
to success lay in the avenue of Islam. They complied with the new realities and 
gathered to pledge fealty to the Prophet [pbuh]. The men came first pledging full 
obedience in all areas they can afford. Then came the women to follow the men’s 
example. The Prophet [pbuh] with ‘Umar bin Al-Khattab receiving the pledge of 
fealty and communicating to them for him. Hind bint ‘Utbah, Abu Sufyan’s wife, 
came in the trail of women disguised lest the Prophet [pbuh] should recognize and 
account for her, having chewed the liver of Hamzah, his uncle. The Prophet [pbuh] 
accepted their allegiance on condition that they associate none with Allâh, to which 
they immediately agreed. He added that they should not practise theft. Here Hind 
complained that her husband, Abu Sufyan, was tight-fisted. Her husband interrupted 
granting all his worldly possessions to her. The Prophet [pbuh] laughed and 

256
recognized the woman.