ah 
After the Pledge (in the form of an oath had been taken) the Prophet [pbuh] sent to 
Yathrib (Madinah) Mus‘ab bin ‘Umair Al-‘Abdari [R], the first Muslim ‘ambassador’ to 
teach the people there the doctrines of Islam, give them practical guidance and 
make attempts at propagating the Islam among those who still professed 
polytheism. As‘ad bin Zurarah hosted him in Madinah. So prepared was the ground, 
and so zealous the propagation that the Islam spread rapidly from house to house 
and from tribe to tribe. There were various cheerful and promising aspects of success 
that characterized Mus‘ab’s task. One day Mus‘ab and As‘ad were on their way to the 
habitations of Bani ‘Abd Al-Ashhal and Bani Zafar, when they went into the premises 
of the latter clan. There they sat near a well conversing with some new converts. 
Sa‘d bin Mu‘adh and Usaid bin Hudair, chiefs of the two clans heard of this meeting, 
so Usaid approached the Muslims armed with his lance while the other Sa‘d excused 
himself on grounds that As‘ad was his maternal cousin. Usaid came closer cursing 
and swearing and accused the two men of befooling people weak of heart, and 
ordered that they stop it altogether. Mus‘ab calmly invited him to sit saying, "If you 
are pleased with our talk, you can accept it; should you hold it in abhorrence, you 
could freely immunize yourself against what you hate." "That’s fair," said Usaid, 
pierced his lance in the sand, listened to Mus‘ab and then heard some verses of the 
Noble Qur’ân. His face bespoke satisfaction and pleasure before uttering any words 

94
of approval. He asked the two men about the procedures pertinent to embracing 
Islam. They asked him to observe washing, purge his garment, bear witness to the 
Truth and then perform two Rak‘a. He responded and did exactly what he was asked 
to do, and then said there was a man (Sa‘d bin Mu‘adh) whose people would never 
hang back if he followed the Islam. He then left to see Sa‘d and his people. Sa‘d 
could immediately understand that Usaid had changed. To a question posed by Sa‘d, 
Usaid said that two men were ready to comply with whatever orders they received. 
He then managed a certain situation that provided the two men with a chance to talk 
with Sa‘d privately. The previous scene with Usaid recurred and Sa‘d embraced 
Islam, and directly turned to his people swearing that he would never talk with them 
until they had believed in Allâh, and in His Messenger. Hardly did the evening of that 
day arrive when all the men and women of that sept of Arabians embraced Islam 
with the exception of one, Al-Usairim, who hung back until the Day of Uhud. On that 
day he embraced Islam and fought the polytheists but was eventually killed before 
observing any prostration in the way of prayer. The Prophet [pbuh] commented 
saying: "He has done a little but his reward is great." 
Mus‘ab stayed in Madinah carrying out his mission diligently and successfully until all 
the houses of Al-Ansar (the future Helpers) had Muslims elements, men and women. 
One family only stood obdurate to the Islamic Da‘wah (Call). They were under the 
influence of the poet Qais bin Al-Aslat, who managed to hold them at bay and screen 
off the Call of Islam from their ears until the year 5 A.H. 
Shortly before the approach of the following pilgrimage season, i.e. the thirteenth 
year of Prophethood, Mus‘ab bin ‘Umair returned to Makkah carrying to the Prophe