Doumat Al-Jandal 
With the Messenger [pbuh]’s return from Badr, peace and security prevailed the 
whole area; and the Islamic headquarters, Madinah, enjoyed full security. The 
Prophet [pbuh] then deemed it fit and appropriate to head for the most distant areas 
of Arabia in order to subdue all hostile elements in order to force undisputed 
recognition out of friend and enemy alike. 
After a six-month lull of military activities, the Prophet [pbuh] was reported that 
some tribes, in the vicinity of Doumat Al-Jandal, on the borders of Syria, were 
involved in highway robbery and plundering, and were on their way to muster troops 
and raid Madinah itself. He immediately appointed Siba‘ bin ‘Arfatah Al-Ghifari to 
dispose the affairs of Madinah during his absence, and set out at the head of 1000 
Muslims in late Rabi‘ Al-Awwal, 5 A.H. taking with him a man, named Madhkur, from 
Bani ‘Udhrah, as a guide. 
On their way to Doumat Al-Jandal, they used to march by night and hide by day, so 
that they might take the enemy by surprise. When they drew near their destination, 
the Muslims discovered that the highway men had moved to another place, so they 
captured their cattle and shepherds. The inhabitants of Doumat Al-Jandal had also 
fled in all directions for their lives and evacuated their habitations. The Prophet 
[pbuh] stayed there for 5 days during which he despatched expeditionary forces to 
hunt for the enemy personnel but they detected none. He then returned to Madinah 
but en route he entered into a peace treaty with ‘Uyainah bin Hisn. Doumat Al-Jandal 

194
is located at about a distance of fifteen days march from Madinah and five from 
Damascus. 
With this decisive and steady progress and wise strict plans, the Prophet [pbuh] 
managed to spread security, control the situation and make peace prevail the whole 
area. He also succeeded in shifting the course of events for the welfare of the 
Muslims by reducing the incessant internal and external troubles. The hypocrites 
were silenced, a tribe of the Jews evacuated while the other continued to fake good 
neighbourliness and seemingly faithful adherence to the covenants, the desert 
bedouins subdued and finally the archenemy Quraish no longer keen on attacking 
the Muslims. This secure strategic attitude created optimum circumstances for the 
Muslims to resume their logical course in propagating Islam and communicating the 
Messages of the Lo