about the death of their tyrant, Ka‘b bin Al-Ashraf, they were 
scared and even their stonelike hearts were in the grip of inexpressible panic. They 
realized that the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] would thenceforth never hesitate to use 

153
force when good words and admonition failed. They remained silent and resigned, 
and faked adherence to covenants. 
Now the Prophet [pbuh] was free to collect his thoughts and give himself up to 
resolving foreign affairs, and facing dangers that could be carried with hostile wind 
blowing again from Makkah.  
The Invasion of Buhran 
In Rabi‘ Ath-Thani, the year 3 A.H. the Prophet [pbuh] led a campaign comprising 
300 warriors to Buhran in the area of Al-Furu‘. He stayed there till Jumada Al-Ula, 3 
A.H. No fighting took place in the process of this patrolling invasion.[Ibn Hisham 2/50,51; Za'd 
Al-Ma'ad 2/91]  
Zaid bin Harithah leads a Campaign on the Trade Routes of Quraish 
This was the most successful campaign prior to Uhud Battle. It took place in Jumada 
Ath-Thaniyah, the year 3 A.H. 
Summer approached and it was high time for the Makkan trade caravans to leave for 
Syria. The people of Quraish whose lives depended mainly on a mercantile economy 
consisting of summer caravans to Syria and winter caravans to Abyssinia (Ethiopia), 
were now at a loss as to what route they would have to follow in order to avoid the 
backbreaking military strikes that the Muslims successfully inflicted on the 
polytheists. 
They held a meeting to discuss the chances of escaping the economic blockade and 
decided to go along a trade route across Najd to Iraq. Furat bin Haiyan was 
appointed as a guide for the caravan. Safwan bin Omaiyah led the caravan along the 
new route. News of the meeting leaked out through Na‘im bin Mas‘ud Al-Ashja‘i 
under the effect of wine, and it flew fast to Madinah by Sulit bin An-Nu‘man. The 
Prophet [pbuh] immediately mustered 100 horsemen under the leadership of Zaid 
bin Harithah Al-Kalbi and despatched them to intercept and capture the caravan. 
They caught up with the camels at a place called Al-Qardah. They took the 
polytheists by surprise and arrested their guide and two other men. Safwan and his 
guards fled away without showing the least resistance. The caravan was carrying 
silver and wares whose value amounted to 100 thousand dirhams. The booty was 
distributed among the Muslim warriors after one-fifth had been set aside for the 
Prophet [pbuh]. Furat bin Haiyan embraced Islam out of his own sweet free will.[Ibn 
Hisham 1/50,51; Fiqh As-Seerah p.190; Rahmat-ul-lil'alameen 2/219] 
As a result of this episode, the Muslims foiled Quraish’s plans to find a new trade 
route. The economic siege laid to Makkah was thus consolidated and had a great 
impact on the mercantile economy of Makkah. The Makkans were terribly anxious 
and worried about their prospects of life now at stake with no hope whatsoever for 
any possible rehabilitation of commercial life or redemption of former prestige at the 
socio-political level except through two avenues categorically contrasting: 
Relinquishing all symbols of arrogance and all attitudes of haughtiness through 
reconciliation with the new status quo, and peaceableness with the Muslims; or 
launching a decisive overwhelming war with the aim of crushing down the military 
forces of Madinah. It was apparent through the process of events that Quraish had 
opted for the second alternative. Loud cries were being heard everywhere in Makkah 

154
demanding immediate v