of Ma‘una Well 
Ma‘una Well tragedy, which was even more horrible than that of Ar-Raji‘, took place 
in the same month. 
Abu Bara’ — ‘Amir bin Malik — nicknamed ‘Spear Player’ came to the Messenger of 
Allâh [pbuh] in Madinah. The Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] called him to embrace Islam 
but he neither agreed nor refused. He said: "O Messenger of Allâh, if you dispatch 
some of your Companions to the people of Najd to call them to Islam, I expect them 
to accept." "I am afraid the people of Najd will kill them." Said the Messenger. But he 
replied, "I will protect them." Ibn Ishaq confirms that forty men were sent to them; 
but As-Sahih states that they were seventy — Al-Mundhir bin ‘Amr, one of Bani 
Sa‘ida, nicknamed ‘Freed to die’ — commanded that group, who were the best and 
most learned in the Qur’ân and jurisprudence. 
On their way to Najd they used to gather firewood to buy food for the people of ‘Ahl 
As-Suffah’ as charity by day and study, meditate on the meanings of the Qur’ân by 
night. They kept on doing that till they arrived at Ma‘una Well — which was a well in 
between Bani ‘Amir, Harrah and Bani Saleem. They stayed there and sent the 
Message of the Prophet [pbuh] with Haram bin Milhan, the brother of Umm Sulaim to 
the enemy of Allâh ‘Amir bin At-Tufail. ‘Amir did not heed the Message but rather 
ordered a man to spear Haram in the back. When the spear penetrated Haram’s 
body, he saw the blood and said: "Allâhu Akbar! (i.e. Allâh is the Greatest) By Lord 
of Al-Ka‘bah I have won!" 
Then the enemy of Allâh, promptly, called out Bani ‘Amir to fight the rest. Bani ‘Amir 
refused because they were under the protection of Abu Bara’. Therefore he turned to 
Bani Saleem for help. The people of ‘Usaiyah, Ri‘al and Dhakwan, who were folks of 
Bani Saleem, responded to his call. The Companions of the Prophet [pbuh], who 
were encompassed by idolaters, kept on fighting till they were all killed. The only 

189
survivor was Ka‘b bin Zaid bin An-Najjar who was carried wounded from among the 
dead. It was in Al-Khandaq (the trench) Battle that he was killed. 
‘Amr bin Omaiyah Ad-Damari and Al-Mundhir bin ‘Uqbah bin ‘Amir, who were 
entrusted with the Muslims’ animals far from them, saw the birds circling in the air 
over the battleground. Al-Mundhir rushed to share in the fight till he was killed. But 
‘Amr bin Omaiyah was captured. ‘Amir set him free when he knew that he was of 
Mudar tribe but that was after he had cut his hair. He did that to fulfil a pledge of his 
mother’s to set a slave free. 
Returning to the Prophet [pbuh] ‘Amr bin Omaiyah conveyed the news of the painful 
disaster, which resulted in the murder of seventy of the best believers, and recalled 
the tragedy of Uhud but with the difference that those of Uhud were killed in a clear 
war but those of Ma‘una were killed in a disgraceful treachery. On his way back to 
Qarqara, ‘Amr bin Omaiyah rested in the shade of a tree, and there two men of Bani 
Kilab joined him. When they slept, ‘Amr killed them both, thinking that by doing that 
he would avenge some of his killed companions. Then he found out that they had 
been given a pledge of protection by the Prophet [pbuh]. He told the Messenger of 
Allâh [pbuh] what he had done. The Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] said to ‘Amr: "You 
have killed two people; their blood-money shall be a debt I have to discharge." He 
then engaged himself collecting their blood-money from the Muslims and their allies, 
the Jews [Ibn Hisham 2/183-188; Za'd Al-Ma'ad 2/109-110; Sahih Al-Bukhari 2/584-
586]. This very act was later to trigger the invasion of Bani An-Nadeer. 
The Prophet [pbuh] was so deeply moved by this tragedy and that of Ar-Raji‘ that he 
used to invoke Allâh’s wrath against those people and tribes who killed his 
Companions. Anas reported that for thirty days the Prophet [pbuh] supplicated Allâh 
against those who killed his Companions at Ma‘una Well. Every dawn prayer he 
would invoke Allâh’s wrath against Ri‘l, Dhakwan, Lihyan and ‘Usaiyah. He would 
say, " ‘Usaiyah disobeyed Allâh and His Messenger." Therefore Allâh ÚÒ æÌá, sent 
down unto His Messenger a Qur’ânic verse that we kept on reciting till it was 
abrogated later on: ‘Inform our folk that we have encountered our Lord and He is 
satisfied with us and we are satisfied with Him.’ So the Messe