l-Ashraf, killed 
Ka‘b bin Al-Ashraf was the most resentful Jew at Islam and the Muslims, the keenest 
on inflicting harm on the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] and the most zealous advocate 
of waging war against him. He belonged to Tai’ tribe but his mother to Banu Nadeer. 
He was a wealthy man known for his handsomeness, and a poet living in luxury in 
his fort south east of Madinah at the rear of Banu Nadeer’s habitations. 
On hearing the news of Badr, he got terribly exasperated and swore that he would 
prefer death to life if the news was true. When this was confirmed he wrote poems 
satirizing Muhammad [pbuh], eulogizing Quraish and enticing them against the 
Prophet [pbuh]. He then rode to Makkah where he started to trigger the fire of war, 
and kindle rancour against the Muslims in Madinah. When Abu Sufyan asked him 
which religion he was more inclined to, the religion of the Makkans or that of 
Muhammad [pbuh] and his companions, he replied that the pagans were better 
guided. With respect to this situation, Allâh revealed His Words: 
"Have you not seen those who were given a portion of the Scripture? They 
believe in Jibt and Taghût, and say to the disbelievers that they are better 
guided as regards the way than the believers (Muslims)." [Al-Qur'an 4:51] 
He then returned to Madinah to start a fresh campaign of slanderous propaganda 
that took the form of obscene songs and amatory sonnets with a view to defaming 
the Muslim women. 

152
At this stage, the situation became unbearable and could no longer be put up with. 
The Prophet [pbuh] gathered his men and said: "Who will kill Ka‘b bin Al-Ashraf? He 
had maligned Allâh, and His Messenger." Thereupon, Muhammad bin Maslamah, 
‘Abbad bin Bishr, Al-Harith bin Aws, Abu ‘Abs bin Hibr and Salkan bin Salamah, 
Ka‘b’s foster brother, volunteered to do the job. 
Muhammad bin Maslamah said: "O Messenger of Allâh, do you wish that I should kill 
him?" He said: "Yes." He said: "Permit me to talk (to him in the way I deem fit)." He 
said: "Talk (as you like)." So, Muhammad bin Maslamah came to Ka‘b and talked to 
him, saying: "This man (i.e. the Prophet [pbuh]) has made up his mind to collect 
charity (from us) and this has put us to a great hardship." When he heard this, Ka‘b 
said: "By Allâh you will be put to more trouble by him." Muhammad bin Maslamah 
answered: "No doubt, now we have become his followers and we do not like to 
forsake him until we see what turn his affairs will take. I want that you should give 
me a loan." He said: "What will you mortgage?" Muhammad answered: "What do you 
want?" The immoral and heartless Jew demanded women and children as articles of 
security against the debt. Muhammad said: "Should we pledge our women whereas 
you are the most handsome of the Arabs; and the son of one of us may be abused 
by saying that he was pledged for two wasq (measurement unit of weight) of dates 
but we can pledge you (our) weapons." Ka‘b agreed. Salkan bin Salamah, Abu 
Na’ilah, at another time, went to see Ka‘b for the same purpose and there were more 
or less the same subjects, only that Abu Na’ilah would bring him some companions. 
The plan was successful and provided for the presence of both men and weapons. On 
Rabi‘ Al-Awwal 14th, at night, the year 3 A.H. the people said good bye to the 
Prophet [pbuh] and set out in the Name of Allâh to implement the carefully drawn 
plan. The Prophet [pbuh] stayed back praying for them and supplicating Allâh to 
render them success. The men went and called upon him at night. He came down 
although his wife warned him not to meet them alleging that: "I hear a voice which 
sounds like the voice of murder." He said: "It is only Muhammad bin Maslamah and 
my foster brother Abu Na’ilah. When a gentleman is called at night even if he be 
pierced with a spear, he should respond to the call." Abu Na’ilah said to his 
companions: "As he comes down, I will extend my hand towards his head to smell 
and when I hold him fast, you should do your job." So when he came down, they 
talked together for about an hour. They then invited him to go out and spend a nice 
time in the moonlight. On the way out, Abu Na’ilah remarked: "I smell the nicest 
perfume from you." Ka‘b said: "Yes, I have with me a mistress who is the most 
scented of the women of Arabia." Abu Na’ilah again said: "Allow me to smell (the 
scent on your head)". He said: "Yes, you may smell." So he caught it and smelt. 
Then he said: "Allow me to do so(once again)." He then held his head fast and said 
to his companions: "Do your job." And they killed him. The group of men came back 
after fulfilling their mission. One of them Al-Harith bin Aws was wounded by mistake 
with the swords of his men, and was bleeding badly. When they reached Baqee‘ Al-
Gharqad, they shouted, "Allâh is Great". The Prophet [pbuh] heard them and realized 
that they had killed the enemy of Allâh. As they saw him, he said: "Cheerful faces 
are yours." In reply, they said: "And yours O Messenger of Allâh." They handed the 
head of the tyrant over to him. He entertained Allâh’s praise for their success. He 
then applied his