he polytheists were paralysed by the carefully planned and speedy movement of 
Muhammad’s followers towards their new abode in Madinah. They were caught in 
unprecedented anxiety and got deeply worried over their whole pagan and economic 
entity. They already experienced Muhammad [pbuh] as an influential leader; and his 
followers as determined, decent and always ready to sacrifice all they had for the 
sake of the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh]. Al-Aws and Al-Khazraj tribes, the would-be-
hosts of the Makkan Muslims, were also known in Arabia for their might and power in 
war, and judicious and sensible approach in peace. They were also averse to rancour 
and prejudice for they themselves had had bitter days of inter-tribal warfare. 
Madinah , itself, the prospective headquarters of the ever-growing Islamic Call, 
enjoyed the most serious strategic position. It commanded the commercial routes 
leading to Makkah whose people used to deal in about a quarter of a million gold 
dinar-worth commodities every year. Security of the caravan routes was crucial for 
the perpetuity of prosperous economic life. All those factors borne in mind, the 
polytheists felt they were in the grip of a serious threat. They, therefore, began to 
seek the most effective method that could avert this imminent danger. They 
convened a meeting on Thursday, 26th Safar, the year fourteen of Prophethood / 
12th September 622 A.D[For details see Rahmat-al-lil'alameen 1/95-102] ., i.e. two 
and a half months after the Great ‘Aqabah Pledge. On that day, "the Parliament of 
Makkah" held the most serious meeting ever, with one item on the agenda: How to 
take effective measures with a view to stopping that tidal wave. Delegates 
representing all the Quraishite tribes attended the meeting, the most significant of 
whom were: 
1. Abu Jahl bin Hisham, from Bani Makhzum;  
2. Jubair bin Mut‘im, Tuaima bin ‘Adi, and Al-Harith bin ‘Amir representing Bani 
Naufal bin ‘Abd Munaf;  
3. Rabi‘a’s two sons Shaibah and ‘Utbah besides Abu Sufyan bin Harb from Bani 
‘Abd Shams bin ‘Abd Munaf;  
4. An-Nadr bin Al-Harith (who had besmeared the Prophet [pbuh] with animal 
entrails) to speak for Bani ‘Abd Ad-Dar;  
5. Abul Bukhtary bin Hisham, Zama‘a bin Al-Aswad and Hakeem bin Hizam to 
represent Bani Asad bin ‘Abd Al-‘Uzza;  
6. Al-Hajjaj’s two sons Nabih and Munbih from Bani Sahm;  
7. Omaiyah bin Khalaf from Bani Jumah.  
On their way to An-Nadwah House, Iblis (Satan) in the guise of a venerable elderly 
man standing at the door interrupted their talk and introduced himself as a man 
from Najd curious enough to attend the meeting, listen to the debate and wish them 
success to reach a sound opinion.