erent 
parties, believers and disbelievers, entered into a truce agreement that 

212
pointed markedly to the ever-growing power of Islam, and recorded 
unequivocally the perpetuity of this heavenly religion in pan-Arabia.                      

213
Al-Hudaibiyah Treaty 
(Dhul Qa‘dah 6 A.H.) 
When Arabia began to witness the large impressive sweep in favour of the Muslims, 
the forerunners of the great conquest and success of the Islamic Call started 
gradually to loom on the demographic horizon, and the true believers restored their 
undisputed right to observe worship in the sacred sanctuary. 
It was about the sixth year Hijri when the Prophet [pbuh] saw in a dream, while he 
was still in Madinah, that he had entered the sacred sanctuary in Makkah in security 
with his followers, and was performing the ceremonies of ‘Umrah (lesser pilgrimage). 
Their heads were being shaved and hair cut off. As soon as he informed some of his 
Companions the contents of his dream, their hearts leapt up with joy since they 
found in it the actualization of their deep longing to take part in pilgrimage and its 
hallowed rites after an exile of six years. 
The Prophet [pbuh] had his clothes washed, mounted his camel and marched out 
towards Makkah at the head of fifteen hundred Muslims including his wife Umm 
Salamah. Some desert bedouins whose Faith was lukewarm hung back and made 
excuses. They carried no weapons with them except sheathed swords because they 
had no intention of fighting. Ibn Umm Maktum was mandated to dispose the affairs 
of Madinah during the Prophet’s absence. As they approached Makkah, and in a place 
called Dhi Hulaifa, he ordered that the sacrificial animals be garlanded, and all 
believers donned Al-Ihrâm, the pilgrim’s garb. He despatched a reconnoiterer to hunt 
around for news of the enemy. The man came back to tell the Prophet [pbuh] that a 
large number of slaves, as well as a huge army, were gathered to oppose him, and 
that the road to Makkah was completely blocked. The Prophet [pbuh] consulted his 
Companions, who were of the opinion that they would fight none unless they were 
debarred from performing their pilgrimage. 
The Quraishites, on their part, held a meeting during which they considered the 
whole situation and decided to resist the Prophet’s mission at all costs. Two hundred 
horsemen led by Khalid bin Al-Waleed were despatched to take the Muslims by 
surprise during Zuhr (the afternoon) prayer. However, the rules of prayer of fear 
were revealed meanwhile and thus Khalid and his men missed the chance. The 
Muslims avoided marching on that way and decided to follow a rugged rocky one. 
Here, Khalid ran back to Quraish to brief them on the latest situation. 
When the Muslims reached a spot called Thaniyat Al-Marar, the Prophet’s camel 
stumbled and knelt down and was too stubborn to move. Muhammad [pbuh] swore 
he would willingly accede to any plan they pu