e furious at the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] 
At first the Prophet’s policy of distribution was uncomprehended by many a man. 
Therefore sharp-tongued people started expressing their objections. The Helpers 
were among those who were afflicted by this policy. They were deprived of Hunain 
gifts though they had been the ones who were summoned at Hunain hard times and 
they were the first to rush to fight with the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] and standfast 
till the defeat turned into victory. Now here they are watching those who escaped fill 
their hands with booty while they are given nothing. 
On the authority of Ibn Ishaq: "When the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] had given 
Quraish and Arab tribes those gifts and allotted nothing to the Helpers, a group of 
the Helpers felt so uneasy about it that a lot of ill-statements against the Prophet 
[pbuh] were spread among them to an extent that one of them said: "By Allâh, the 
Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] was ill-spoken of by his folksmen!" And those ill-

265
statements went on spreading till Sa‘d bin ‘Ubadah met the Messenger of Allâh 
[pbuh], who in his turn faced his people after a while. 
Sa‘d bin ‘Ubadah said: "O Messenger of Allâh, this group of the Helpers are furious at 
you about the distribution of the booty that you had won. You have allotted shares to 
your own kinsmen and forwarded lots of gifts to the Arab tribes. But this group has 
obtained nothing." The Prophet [pbuh] asked Sa‘d exclaiming: "Sa‘d, what do you 
think of all that?" Sa‘d replied: "O Messenger of Allâh. You know that I am nothing 
but a member of this group." "Call out on your people and bring them forth to me 
into this shed." Said the Prophet [pbuh]. 
So Sa‘d went out and summoned them. When some Emigrants came, he let them in 
but forbade others. When they were all gathered together, he informed the Prophet 
saying: "This group of the Helpers have just arrived to meet you in compliance with 
your orders." As soon as the Messenger [pbuh] faced them he thanked Allâh and 
praised Him, then said to them inquiring, "I have been told that you are angry with 
me. Didn’t I come to you when you were astray and Allâh guided you? You were poor 
and Allâh gave you wealth. Weren’t you foes and Allâh made you love one another." 
"Yes," they said, "Allâh and His Messenger are better and more gracious." Then he 
said: "What prevents you from replying to the Messenger of Allâh, O tribe of 
Helpers?" They said, "What should be the reply, O Messenger of Allâh, while to the 
Lord and to his Messenger belong all benevolence and grace." 
The Prophet [pbuh] again said: 
"But by Allâh, you might have answered and answered truly, for I would 
have testified to its truth myself: ‘You came to us belied and rejected and 
we accepted you; you came to us as helpless and we helped you; a fugitive, 
and we took you in; poor and we comforted you’.  
You Helpers, do you feel anxious for the things of this world, wherewith I 
have sought to incline these people unto the Faith in which you are already 
established?  
Are you not satisfied, O group of Helpers that the people go with ewes and 
camels while you go along with the Messenger of Allâh ([pbuh]) to your 
dwellings. By Him in Whose Hand is my life, had there been no migration, I 
would have been one of the Helpers. If the people would go through a valley 
and passage, and the Helpers go through another valley and passage, I 
would go through the valley and passage of the Helpers. Allâh! Have mercy 
on the Helpers, their children and their children’s children." 
The audience wept until tears