the 15th verse. 
From the context of these verses and their relevant interpretation, we can safely 
establish it that the Prophet [pbuh] was not aware of the presence of that group of 
jinns. It was only when Allâh revealed those verses that he came to know of it. The 
verses also confirm that it was the first time they came. However, the context of the 
different versions suggests that the jinns repeated their visits later on. The presence 
of that company of jinns comes in the context of the Divine support given to His 
Messenger, and constitutes a propitious sign of ultimate victory and success for the 
Call of Islam. It provides an unshakable proof that no power however mighty could 
alter what is wrought by Allâh: 
"And whosoever does not respond to Allâh’s Caller, he cannot escape on 
earth, and there will be no Auliyâ (protectors) from him besides Allâh (from 
Allâh’s punishment). Those are in manifest error." [Al-Qur'an 46:32] 
"And we think that we cannot escape (from the punishment of) Allâ h in the 
earth, nor can we escape (from the punishment) by flight." [Al-Qur'an 72:12] 
Given this support and auspicious start, depression, dismay and sadness that used to 
beset him since he was driven out of At-Ta’if, he turned his face towards Makkah 
with fresh determination to resume his earlier plan to expose people to Islam and 
communicate his Message in a great spirit of zeal and matchless enthusiasm. 
Zaid bin Harithah, his companion, addressing the Prophet [pbuh] said, "How dare 
you step into Makkah after they (Quraish) have expatriated you?" The Prophet 
[pbuh] answered: "Hearken Zaid, Allâh will surely provide relief and He will verily 
support His religion and Prophet." 
When he was a short distance from Makkah, he retired to Hira’ Cave. Whence he 
despatched a man from Khuza‘ah tribe to Al-Akhnas bin Shuraiq seeking his 
protection. The latter answered that he was Quraish’s ally and in no position to offer 
protection. He despatched the messenger to Suhail bin ‘Amr, but to no avail, either. 
Al-Mut‘im bin ‘Adi, a notable in Makkah, however, volunteered to respond to the 
Prophet’s appeal for shelter. He asked his people to prepare themselves fully armed 
and then asked Muhammad [pbuh] to enter into the town and directly into the Holy 
Sanctuary. The Prophet [pbuh] observed a two-Rak‘a prayer and left for his house 
guarded by the heavily-armed vigilant ‘Adi’s. 
It has been reported that later Abu Jahl, the archenemy of Islam, asked Mut‘im if his 
behaviour suggested protection or conversion, the latter replied it was merely 
protection. Abu Jahl was relieved and said that he would give Muhammad protection 
for his sake. 
The Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] never forgot Mut‘im’s favour. At the conclusion of the 
battle of Badr, he declared publicly that if Mut‘im had been still alive and asked