hird and last stage of the life of the Messenger [pbuh] embodies the fruitful 
results of his call to Islam, which were the consequences of long-timed holy fights in 
the way of Allâh (Jihad), troubles, toil, disturbances, trials and a lot of bloody 
conflicts and battles, which lasted for over twenty years. 
The conquest of Makkah was considered the most serious profit achieved by Muslims 
during those years. For it affected the course of events and consequently altered the 
Arabs’ whole life. It was a decisive distinction between preconquest and post-
conquest periods. For Quraish, at that time, was in the eyes of Arabs the defenders 
and helpers of Arabs. Other Arabs are only their ancillaries. The submission of 
Quraish is, therefore, estimated to be a final elimination of paganism in the Arabian 
Peninsula. 
This stage can be divided into two main phases: 
The phase of: 
1. holy wars and fighting. 
2. the tribes and people’s race to embrace Islam. 
Being so close and rather inseparable, the two phases of this stage intervene in such 
a way that a happening of one phase occurs during the progress of the other. 
However, we have preferred — for expository purposes — to deal with these two 
phases distinctively. The fighting phase was given the priority in order, due to the 
fact that it is more intimate and fit than the other.  
Hunain Ghazwah  
The conquest of Makkah which came forth as a consequence of a swift blow 
astounded both the Arabs and other tribes who realized that they were doomed and 
had to submit to the new situation as a fait accompli. Some of the fierce, powerful 
proud tribes did not submit and favoured resistance. Ahead of these were the septs 
of Hawazin and Thaqif. Nasr, Jashm and Sa‘d bin Bakr and people of Bani Hilal — all 
of whom of Qais ‘Ailan. They thought that they were too mighty to admit or 
surrender to such a victory. So they met Malik bin ‘Awf An-Nasri and made up their 
mind to proceed fighting against the Muslims. 
The Enemy’s March and their Encampment at Awtas 
When Malik bin ‘Awf — the general leader — decided to march and fight the Muslims, 
he made his countrypeople take their wealth, women and children with them to 
Awtas — which is a valley in Hawazin land and is quite near Hunain. It differs from 
Hunain in its being adjacent to Dhi-Al-Majaz which is around ten miles from Makkah 
in ‘Arafat’s direction. [Fath Al-Bari 8/27,42] 
    

259
The War-experienced Man wrongs the Leader’s Judgement 
As soon as they had camped in Awtas, people crowded round Malik. The old sane 
Duraid bin As-Simmah, who was well-known as a war-experienced man, and who 
was among those who gathered round Malik, asked: "What valley are we in?" "In 
Awtas," they said. "What a good course it is for horses! It is neither a sharp pointed 
height nor a loosed soiled plain. What? Why do I hear camels’ growling, the donkeys’ 
braying, the children’s cries and the sheep bleating?" asked Duraid. They said: "Malik 
bin ‘Awf had made people bring their women, properties and children with them." So 
he called Malik and asked him what made him do such a thing. Malik said that his 
aim was to have everybody’s family and properties around them so that they fight 
fiercely to protect them." "I swear by Allâh that you are nothing but a shepherd," 
answered Duraid, "Do you believe that there is anything whatsoever, can stand in 
the way of a defeated one or stop him from fleeing? If you win the battle you avail 
nothing but a man with a sword and a spear; but if you lose you will bring disgrace 
on your people and properties," then he resumed his talk and went on wondering 
about some septs and their leaders. "O Malik, thrusting the distinguished people of 
Hawazin into the battlefield will avail you nothing. Raise them up to where they can 
be safe. Then make the young people mount their horses and fight. If you win, those 
whom you tarried will follow you, but if you were the loser it would be a loss of a 
battle, but your kinsmen, people and properties would not be lost." 
But Malik, the general l