Badr, the Second 
When the Muslims destroyed the power of the Arab-desert tribes and guarded 
themselves against their evils, they started preparations to encounter their great 
enemy. A year elapsed since they fought Quraish at Uhud. So it was due time to 
meet them and start war again in order to determine which of the two parties was 
worthy of survival. [Fiqh As-Seerah p.315] 
In Sha‘ban 4 A.H., January 626 A.D., the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] set out to Badr 
accompanied by one thousand and five hundred fighters and ten mounted horsemen, 
and with ‘Ali bin Abi Talib as standard bearer. ‘Abdullah bin Rawahah was given 

193
authority over Madinah during the Prophet [pbuh]’s absence. Reaching Badr, the 
Muslims stayed there waiting for the idolaters to come. 
Abu Sufyan’s forces comprised two thousand footmen and fifty horsemen. They 
reached Mar Az-Zahran, some distance form Makkah, and camped at a water place 
called Mijannah. Being reluctant, discouraged and extremely terrified of the 
consequences of the approaching fight, Abu Sufyan turned to his people and began 
to introduce cowardice-based flimsy pretexts in order to dissuade his men from going 
to war, saying: "O tribe of Quraish! Nothing will improve the condition you are in but 
a fruitful year — a year during which your animals feed on plants and bushes and 
give you milk to drink. And I see that this is a rainless year, therefore I am returning 
now and I recommend you to return with me." 
It seems that his army were also possessed of the same fears and apprehensions, 
for they readily obeyed him without the least hesitation. 
The Muslims, who were then at Badr, stayed for eight days waiting for their enemy. 
They took advantage of their stay by selling goods and earning double as much the 
price out of it. When the idolaters declined to fight, the balance of powers shifted to 
rest in favour of the Muslims, who thus regained their military reputation, their 
dignity and managed to impose their awe-inspiring presence over the whole of 
Arabia. In brief, they mastered and controlled the whole situation. 
This invasion had many a name. It is called ‘Bad