lievers saw ‘Al-Ahzab’ (the confederates), they said: ‘This 
is what Allâh and His Messenger (Muhammad [pbuh]) had promised us, and 
Allâh and His Messenger (Muhammad [pbuh]) had spoken the truth, and it 
only added to their Faith and to their submissiveness (to Allâh)." [Al-Quran 
33:22] 
Three thousand Muslims, with Muhammad [pbuh] at their head, came out to 
encounter the idolaters, with Allâh’s Promise of victory deeply established in their 
minds. They entrenched themselves in Sila‘ Mountain with the trench standing as a 
barrier between them and the disbelievers. 
On attempting to attack the Muslims and break into Madinah, the idolaters were 
surprised to see a wide trench, a new stratagem unknown in Arabia before, standing 
as an obstinate obstruction. Consequently they decided to lay siege to Madinah and 
began to manoeuvre around the trench trying hard to find a vulnerable spot through 
which they could infiltrate into Madinah. To deter their enemies from approaching or 
bridging any gap in their defences, the Muslims hurled arrows, and engaged in 
skirmishes with them. The veteran fighters of Quraish were averse to this situation 
waiting in vain in anticipation of what the siege might reveal. Therefore they decided 
that a group of fighters led by ‘Amr bin ‘Abd-e-Wudd, ‘Ikrima bin Abi Jahl and Dirar 
bin Al-Khattab, should work its way through the trench. They, in fact, managed to do 
that and their horsemen captured a marshy area between the trench and Sila‘ 
Mountain. ‘Amr challenged the Muslims to a duel, and ‘Ali bin Abi Talib was deputed. 
After a short but fierce engagement, ‘Ali killed ‘Amr and obliged the others to 
evacuate in a state of panic and confusion. However, some days later, the 
polytheists conducted fresh desperate attempts but all of them failed due to Muslims’ 
steadfastness and heroic confrontation. 

197
In the context of the events of the Trench Battle, the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] 
failed to observe some prayers in their right time. Jabir [R] narrated: On the Day of 
Trench ‘Umar bin Al-Khattab [R] came, cursing the disbelievers of Quraish and said: 
"O Allâh’s Messenger! I have not offered the afternoon prayer and the sun has set." 
The Prophet [pbuh] replied: "By Allâh! I, too, have not offered the prayer yet." The 
Prophet [pbuh] then went to Buthan, performed ablution and observed the afternoon 
prayer after the sun had set and then offered the sunset prayer after it."[Sahih Al-Bukhari 
2/590] He was so indignant for this failure that he invoked Allâh’s wrath on his enemies 
and besought Allâh to fill their houses and graves with fire because they distracted 
him from observing the afternoon prayer. It was narrated by Ahmed and Shafa‘i that 
the events of that battle detained him from the noon, afternoon, evening and night 
prayers, but he observed them combined. The different narrations point to the fact 
that the situation lasted for a few days.[Mukhtasar Seerat Ar-Rasool p.287; Sahih Muslim 1/227] 
It is clear that, and because of the trench standing between the two parties, no 
direct engagement took place, but rather there were military activities confined to 
arrow hurling, consequently the fight claimed the lives of a small number of fighters, 
six Muslims and ten polytheists, one or two killed by sword. 
During the process of fighting, Sa‘d bin Mu‘adh was shot by an arrow that pierced his 
artery. Perceiving his end approaching, he invoked Allâh saying: "Oh, Allâh, you 
know nothing is closer to my heart than striving in Your way against those people 
(disbelievers) who belied Your Messenger and banished him from his town. Oh, Allâh, 
I deeply believe that You have decreed that we should fight them, so if there is still 
more fighting to go with them, let me stay alive in order to strive more against 
them. If it has settled down, I beseech you to ignite it again so that I breathe my 
last in its context."[Sahih Al-Bukhari 3/591] He concluded his supplication beseeching Allâh 
not to let him die until he had had full revenge on Banu Quraiza. In the midst of 
these difficult circumstances, plottery and intrigues were in fervent action against the 
Muslims. The chief criminal of Bani Nadir, Huyai, headed for the habitations of Banu 
Quraiza to incite their chief Ka‘b bin Asad Al-Qurazi, who had drawn a pact with the 
Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] to run to his aid in times of war. Ka‘b, in the beginning 
resisted all Huyai’s temptation, but Huyai was clever enough to manipulate him, 
speaking of Quraish and their notables in Al-Asyal, as well as Ghatfan and their 
chieftains entrenched in Uhud, all in one mind, determined to exterminate 
Muhammad [pbuh] and his followers. He, moreover, promised to stay in Ka‘b’s fort 
exposing himself to any potential danger in case Quraish and Ghatfan recanted. The 
wicked man went on in this