Makkah and transfer of rulership over Makkah and custodianship of the Holy 
Sanctuary to Qusai, after fierce wars between Qusai and Khuza‘a inflicting heavy 
casualties on both sides, reconciliation and then arbitration of Ya‘mur bin ‘Awf, from 
the tribe of Bakr, whose judgement entailed eligibility of Qusai’s rulership over 

19
Makkah and custodianship of the Sacred House, Qusai’s irresponsibility for Khuza‘a’s 
blood shed, and imposition of blood money on Khuza‘a. Qusai’s reign over Makkah 
and the Sacred House began in 440 A.D. and allowed him, and Quraish afterwards, 
absolute rulership over Makkah and undisputed custodianship of the Sacred House to 
which Arabs from all over Arabia came to pay homage.  
Qusai brought his kinspeople to Makkah and allocated it to them, allowing Quraish 
some dwellings there. An-Nus’a, the families of Safwan, Adwan, Murra bin ‘Awf 
preserved the same rights they used to enjoy before his arrival. [Ibn Hisham 1/124] 
A significant achievement credited to Qusai was the establishment of An-Nadwa 
House (an assembly house) on the northern side of Al-Ka‘bah Mosque, to serve as a 
meeting place for Quraish. This very house had benefited Quraish a lot because it 
secured unity of opinions amongst them and cordial solution to their problem. [Ibn 
Hisham 1/125; Akhbar Al-Kiram p.152] 
Qusai however enjoyed the following privileges of leadership and honour:  
1. Presiding over An-Nadwa House meetings where consultations relating to 
serious issues were conducted, and marriage contracts were announced. 
2. The Standard: He monopolized in his hand issues relevant to war launching. 
3. Doorkeeping of Al-Ka‘bah: He was the only one eligible to open its gate, and 
was responsible for its service and protection. 
4. Providing water for the Pilgrims: This means that he used to fill basins 
sweetened by dates and raisins for the pilgrims to drink. 
5. Feeding Pilgrims: This means making food for pilgrims who could not afford it. 
Qusai even imposed on Quraish annual land tax, paid at the season of 
pilgrimage, for food. [Ibn Hisham 1/130]  
It is noteworthy however that Qusai singled out ‘Abd Manaf, a son of his, for honour 
and prestige though he was not his elder son (‘Abd Ad-Dar was), and entrusted him 
with such responsibilities as chairing of An-Nadwa House, the standard, the 
doorkeeping of Al-Ka‘bah, providing water and food for pilgrims. Due to the fact that 
Qusai’s deeds were regarded as unquestionable and his orders inviolable, his death 
gave no rise to conflicts among his sons, but it later did among his grand children, 
for no sooner than ‘Abd Munaf had died, his sons began to have rows with their 
cousins —sons of ‘Abd Ad-Dar, which would have given rise to dissension and 
fighting among the whole tribe of Quraish, had it not been for a peace treaty 
whereby posts were reallocated so as to preserve feeding and providing water for 
pilgrims for the sons of ‘Abd Munaf; while An-Nadwa House, the flag and the 
doorkeeping of Al-Ka‘bah were maintained for the sons of ‘Abd Ad-Dar. The sons of 
‘Abd Munaf, however, cast the lot for their charge, and consequently left the charge 
of food and water giving to Hashim