Allâh." [Al-Qur'an 33:5] 

315
"Muhammad ([pbuh]) is not the father of any man among you, but he is the 
Messenger of Allâh, and the last (end) of the Prophets." [Al-Qur'an 33:40] 
Lots of deeply-rooted traditions cannot be uprooted or demolished or even adjusted 
by mere words. They must be matched and associated with the action of the 
advocate of the Message himself. 
This could be perceived through the deeds practised by the Muslims at Al-Hudaibiyah 
‘Umrah (Lesser Pilgrimage) during which ‘Urwah bin Mas‘ud Al-Thaqafi saw certain 
Muslims tend to pick up any expectoration that fell down from the Prophet [pbuh]. 
He also saw them race to the water of his ablution and they almost quarrelled for it. 
There were others who competed to pledge allegiance to death and some others 
pledged not to flee from (the battlefield). Among those people, were eminent 
Companions like ‘Umar and Abu Bakr, who although dedicated all their lives to the 
Prophet [pbuh] and to the cause of Islam, but refused to carry out the Messenger’s 
ordres with respect to slaughtering sacrificial animals after the ratification of Al-
Hudaibiyah Peace Treaty, the thing that perturbed and caused the Prophet [pbuh] to 
feel anxious. However, when Umm Salamah [R] advised that he take the initiative 
and sacrifice his animals, his followers raced to follow his example; a clear evidence 
in support of the saying: Actions speak louder than words, in the process of 
exterminating a deeply-established tradition. 
Hypocrites aroused a lot of suspicions and made a broad false propaganda against 
that marriage. Their acts and talks about that marriage had ill-effects on those 
Muslims whose Faith was still weak, particularly that Zainab was the fifth wife — and 
the Noble Qur’ân limited the number up to four only; Zaid was traditionally his son, 
and so a father marrying his son’s divorcee was a heinous sin in the eyes of the 
Arabians. 
Al-Ahzab Surah was revealed to shed full light on the two issues, i.e. Islam does not 
recognize adoption of children, and the Prophet [pbuh] is given (by Allâh) more 
freedom as regards the number of wives he can hold than