idolaters for departure came to an end, Abu Sufyan 
went up the mountain and called out: "Is Muhammad [pbuh] among you?" They did 
not answer him. Then he asked "Is Ibn Abi Quhafah (i.e. Abu Bakr) among you?" 
They did not answer. He asked again: "Is ‘Umar bin Al-Khattab among you?" They 
did not answer him; for the Prophet [pbuh] forbade them answering him. He only 
asked about those three. That is because he and his people knew quite well that the 
call to Islam depended to a large degree on those men. Abu Sufyan then said: "As 
for those three, we have relieved you of." ‘Umar could not help but talking, so he 
said, "O enemy of Allâh, those whom you have just mentioned, I tell you that they 
are still alive. Allâh has maintained what you hate." Abu Sufyan answered: "The 
mutilation of your killed is something I did not order it; but it did not displease me." 
Then he shouted: "Hubal (an idol), let it be sublime!" The Prophet [pbuh] said: "Why 
do you not reply?" "What shall we say?" They asked him. "Say: Allâh is more 
Sublime and Exalted and Mightier as well." 
He said: "Al-‘Uzza (i.e. an idol) is ours but you have no ‘Uzza." "Why do you not 
reply?" The Prophet [pbuh] said. "What shall we say?" They inquired. He said: "Say 
Allâh is our Protector, but you have no protector." 
Abu Sufyan said: "Well deeds! Today is a vengeance for Badr Day. This for that. War 
is attended with alternate success." ‘Umar’s reply was: "No. They are not the same. 
Our killed men are housed in Paradise; but yours are in Fire." 
Then Abu Sufyan said: "Come on, ‘Umar!" The Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] said: "Go 
and see what the matter is." He went there. Abu Sufyan asked him: "I beseech you 
by Allâh’s Name to tell me the truth: Have we killed Muhammad [pbuh]?" ‘Umar 
said: "O Allâh, ‘No’ and now he is listening to you words." He said: "For me, you are 
more truthful than Ibn Qami’a, and even more reliable." [Ibn Hisham 2/93,94; Za'd Al-Ma'ad 
2/94; Sahih Al-Bukhari 2/579]  
Ibn Ishaq said: When Abu Sufyan and those who were with him were leaving he 
called out notifying: "We will meet again at Badr next year." The Messenger of Allâh 
[pbuh] said to one of his men: "Say: ‘Yes, it is an appointment