The Islamic Call eventually prevailed all over Arabia. It removed all traces of Al-
Jahiliyah from the horizon of the peninsula. The sick minds of Al-Jahiliyah grew 
healthy in Islam. They did not only get rid of idol-worship, but they also knocked 
them down. The general atmosphere began to echo "there is no god but Allâh." The 
calls to prayers were heard five times a day penetrating space and breaking the 
silence of the dead desert and bringing back life through the new belief. Reciters and 
memorizers of the Qur’ân set out northwards and southwards reciting verses of the 
Qur’ân and carrying out Allâh’s injunctions. 
Scattered people and tribes were united and man moved from man’s worship of man 
to man’s worship of Allâh. There were no more oppressors nor oppressed; no 
masters nor slaves, nor people bound to other people, nor aggressors that would 
practise aggression. All people were slaves of Allâh. They were beloved brothers 
obeying Allâh’s rules. Thanks to Allâh they disposed of arrogance and the boastful 
spirit: 
"An Arab is no better than a non-Arab. In return a non-Arab is no better 
than an Arab. A red raced man was not better than a black one except in 
piety. Mankind are all Adam’s children and Adam was created from dust." 
Thanks to the Islamic Call, the Arab unity had become a reality, and so was the case 
with human unity and social justice as far as their earthly and heavenly affairs were 
concerned. The time course of events had changed, the features on the earth’s 
surface and the crooked line of history had grown straight and the mentality had 
been rectified. 
The spirit and the corrupted conscience of people, the distorted values and measures 
of Al-Jahiliyah had overwhelmed the whole world during that period of Al-Jahiliyah. 
The prevalence of slavery, injustice, extravagant luxury, adultery, depression, 
deprivity, disbelief, stray from the straight path and darkness; all of those were fait 
accomplis in spite of the existence of the heavenly religions. The teachings of those 
religions had grown weak and lost all influence on men’s souls and spirits and 
became mere lifeless ritual traditions. 
When this Call had accomplished its role in human life, it freed mankind’s spirit of 
superstitions, illusions, white slavery, corruption and man’s worship of man. Islam 
had freed the human society of filth, dissolution, injustice and tyranny. There were 
no more social distinctions, nor clergymen’s or governors’ dictatorship. Islam had set 
up a world built on solid virtuous and clean foundations, it was based on positivity, 
righteous construction, freedom and renewal. Truth, faith, dignity active steady 
deeds, the development and improvement of means of living and reclaim of rights 
were all bases upon which the Islamic state was built. [Madha Khasira Al-'Alam bi-Inhitatil-Muslimeen 
p.14] 
Thanks to these evolutions, Arabia witnessed such an unprecedented blessed 
resurrection, since construction and establishment found its way to it. Never had its 
histo