Haneefa Delegation: They arrived in Madinah in the ninth year 
of Al-Hijra. They were 17 in number and included the Master of Liars, 
Musailima [Fath Al-Bari 8/87] bin Thumamah bin Kabeer bin Habeeb bin Al-

292
Harith of Bani Haneefa The group of delegates were housed in a Helper’s 
house. They came to the Prophet [pbuh] and declared their Islamization. As 
for Musailima the liar, versions vary concerning his embracing Islam. 
Contemplation of all these versions shows clearly that Musailima expressed 
disapproval and revealed haughtiness, boastful spirit and expectations to be a 
prince.  
At first the Prophet [pbuh] attempted going on well with him. he dealt with 
him nicely and charitably but that did not do with him. The Messenger of Allâh 
[pbuh] perceived evil in his soul and recognized that he was one of those 
three evils he dreamt of while asleep. 
The Prophet [pbuh] had already dreamt that he had been granted the 
treasures of earth. His hand fell upon two golden bracelets, which distressed 
and worried him a lot. He was taught by inspiration to blow them off, so he 
did that and they were gone off. They were interpreted to be two liars who 
would turn up after the death of Muhammad [pbuh]. So when Musailima 
acted that way and showed disapproval, he realized that he would be one of 
the two liars. However Musailima used to say, "If Muhammad appointed me a 
successor of his, I would be a Muslim. Later on the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] 
came to him, with a piece of palm leaf in his hand, and in the company of his 
orator, Thabit bin Qais bin Shammas. He was among some of his friends. The 
Prophet [pbuh] talked to him but Musailima addressed him saying: "If you 
agree to transfer the whole thing to me after your death, I will not stand in 
your way." The Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] replied: "If you asked me to give 
you this (i.e. a piece of a palm leaf), I would not grant it to you. You are 
doomed. Even if you repented and stopped what you were doing, Allâh 
appointed that you would be slain. By Allâh, I swear, that I see you now in 
the very state that has been revealed to me. Here is Thabit! You will hear my 
answer (from him)." Then he wen