he whole cause of Faith was thus at stake with four furious parties laying ambushes 
against the new religion, each in its style: Pretension to Islam embedded with 
conspiracy plots and provocative deeds within Madinah, explicitly uncovered 
animosity pregnant with indignation and fire of rage on the part of the Jews, and 
there in Makkah open and persistent calls for vengeance coupled with open 
intentions to mobilize all potential resources available to silence the voice of Islam 
once and for all. This was later translated into military action, Uhud Invasion, which 
left a very bad impression on the good name and esteem that the Muslims were 
painstakingly working to merit and preserve. 
The Muslims were always obliged to be on the lookout for any hostile movements, 
and it was imperative on them to launch pre-emptive strikes in all directions in order 
to enjoy a reasonable degree of security in this great instability-provoking ocean of 
unrest. The following is a list of military activities conducted in the post-Badr era:  
Al-Kudr Invasion 
The scouting body of Madinah reported that Banu Saleem of Ghatafan were engaged 
in mustering troops to invade the Muslims. The Prophet [pbuh] took the initiative 
himself and mounted a surprise attack on them in their own homeland at a watering 
place called Al-Kudr. Banu Saleem, on receiving the news, had fled before he 
arrived. He stayed there for three days, took their 500 camels as booty and 
distributed them to the fighters after he had set aside the usual one-fifth; each one 
gained two camels. 
This invasion took place in Shawwal in the year 2 A.H., seven days after the event of 
Badr.[Za'd Al-Ma'ad 2/90; Ibn Hisham 2/43,44; Mukhtasar Seerat Ar-Rasool p.236] 

148
 
An Attempt on the Life of the Prophet [pbuh] 
The impact of defeat at Badr was so great that the Makkans began to burn with 
indignation and resentment over their horrible losses. To resolve this situation two 
polytheists volunteered to quench their thirst and muffle the source of that 
humiliation i.e. the Prophet [pbuh]. 
‘Umair bin Wahab Al-Jumahi, a terrible polytheist, and an archenemy Safwan bin 
Omaiyah sat together privately lamenting their loss and remembering their dead and 
captives. ‘Umair expressed a fervent desire to kill the Prophet [pbuh] and release his 
captured son in Madinah, if it was not for the yoke of debts he was under and the 
large family he had to support. Safwan, also had his good reasons to see the Prophet 
[pbuh] killed, so he offered to discharge ‘Umair’s debts and support his family if he 
went on with his plan. 
‘Umair agreed and asked Safwan to be reticent on the whole scheme. He left for 
Madinah, having with him a sword to which he applied some kind of lethal poison. 
‘Umar bin Al-Khattab saw him at the door of the Mosque and understood that he had 
come with evil intentions. He immediately went into the Mosque and informed the 
Prophet [pbuh]. He was let in looped by the sling of his sword and in greeting he said 
"good morning", to which the Prophet [pbuh] replied that Allâh had been Gracious 
and taught them the greeting of the dwellers of the Paradise: "peace be upon you!" 
To a question raised by the Prophet [pbuh], about his object, ‘Umair said that he had 
come to see that his captured son was well treated. As for the sword, which the 
Prophet [pbuh] asked him about, he cursed it and said that it gained them nothing. 
On exhorting him to tell his real goal, he remained obdurate and did not divulge the 
secret meeting with Safwan. Here the Prophet [pbuh] got impatient and he himself 
revealed to ‘Umair his secret mission. ‘Umair was taken by surprise, and incredible 
astonishment seized him, and immediately bore witness to the Messengership of 
Muhammad [pbuh]. He then began to entertain Allâh’s praise for having been guided 
to the ‘Straight Path’. The Prophet [pbuh] was pleased and asked his Companions to 
teach ‘Umair the principles of Islam, recite to him the Noble Qur’ân and release his 
son from captivity. 
Sa