of course. 
The Prophet [pbuh], at the head of his army, marched out along the main road 
leading to Makkah. He then turned left towards Badr and when he reached As-Safrâ’, 
he despatched two men to scout about for the camels of Quraish. 
Abu Sufyan, on the other hand, was on the utmost alert. He had already been aware 
that the route he was following was attended with dangers. He was also anxious to 
know about the movements of Muhammad [pbuh]. His scouting men submitted to 
him reports to the effect that the Muslims were lying in ambush for his caravan. To 
be on the safe side, he hired Damdam bin ‘Amr Al-Ghifari to communicate a message 
asking for help from the Quraishites. The messenger rode fast and reached Makkah 
in frenzy. Felling himself from his camel, he stood dramatically before Al-Ka‘bah, cut 
off the nose and the ears of the camel, turned its saddle upside down, tore off his 
own shirt from front and behind, and cried: "O Quraish! Your merchandise! It is with 

133
Abu Sufyan. The caravan is being intercepted by Muhammad [pbuh] and his 
companions. I cannot say what would have happened to them. Help! Help!" 
The effect of this hue and cry was instantaneous and the news stunned Quraish and 
they immediately remembered their pride that was wounded when the Muslims had 
intercepted Al-Hadrami caravan. They therefore swiftly mustered almost all of their 
forces and none stayed behind except Abu Lahab, who delegated someone who owed 
him some money. They also mobilized some Arab tribes to contribute to the war 
against the Prophet [pbuh]. All the clans of Quraish gave their consent except Banu 
‘Adi. Soon an excited throng of 1300 soldiers including 100 horsemen and 600 
mailed soldiers with a large number of camels, was clamouring to proceed to fight 
the Muslims. For food supplies, they used to slaughter an alternate number of camels 
of ten and nine every day. They were however afraid that Banu Bakr, on account of 
old long deep-seated animosity, would attack their rear. At that critical moment, Iblis 
(Satan) appeared to them in the guise of Suraqa bin Malik bin Ju‘sham Al-Mudlaji — 
chief of Bani Kinana — saying to them: "I guarantee that no harm will happen from 
behind." 
They set out burning with indignation, motivated by a horrible desire for revenge and 
exterminating anyone that might jeopardize the routes of their caravans: 
"…boastfully and to be seen of men, and hinder (men) from the path of 
Allâh. " [Al-Qur'an 8:47] 
Or as the Prophet [pbuh] said: 
"O Allâh these are the haughty and conceited; they have come defying Allâh 
and defying His Messenger." 
They moved swiftly northward to Badr. On the way they received another message 
from Abu Sufyan asking them to go back home because the caravan had escaped the 
Muslims. Incidentally, Abu Sufyan, on learning the intention of the Muslims, led his 
caravan off the main route, and inclined it towards the Red Sea. By this manoeuvre, 
he was able to slip past the Madinese ambush and was out of their reach. 
On receiving Abu Sufyan’s message, the Makkan army showed a desire to return 
home. The tyrant Abu Jahl, however haughtily and arrogantly insisted that they 
proceed to Badr, stay three nights there for making festivities. Now they wanted to 
punish the Muslims and prevent them from intercepting their caravans, and impress 
on the Arabs that Quraish still had the upper hand and enjoyed supremacy in that 
area. 
Abu Jahl’s threats and insistence notwithstanding, Banu Zahrah, acting on the advice 
of Al-Akhnas bin Shuraiq, broke away and returned to Makkah. Thenceforth Al-
Akhnas remained ‘the well-rubbed palm tree’ for Bani Zahrah and was blindly obeyed 
in all relevant m