deer Invasion 
We have already spoken about the disgraceful behaviour of the Jews and how they 
were always thirsting to shed the blood of the Muslims and undermine the cause of 
Islam despite all the covenants and pledges they had given to the Prophet [pbuh]. 
Their behaviour fluctuated between resignation and slackness after the Banu 
Qainuqa‘ event and the murder of Ka‘b bin Al-Ashraf, and rebellion coupled with 
treacherous clandestine contacts with Quraish and the hypocrites in order to 
establish an alliance against the Muslims after the battle of Uhud ['Aunul Ma'bood 
3/116-117]. Being inexperienced in war tactics, they resorted to conspiracy and 
intrigue hatching. They first of all declared open hatred and enmity, and chose to 
play all sorts of tricks that might harm the Muslims, but were very careful not to 
initiate any sort of hostilities that might involve them in open war. 
The Prophet [pbuh], on his part, exercised the highest degree of patience with them 
but they went too far in their provocative deeds, especially after Ar-Raji‘ and Ma‘una 
Well events; they even made an attempt on his life. 

190
Once the Prophet [pbuh] with some of his Companions set out to see Banu Nadeer 
and seek their help in raising the blood-money he had to pay to Bani Kalb for the two 
men that ‘Amr bin Omaiyah Ad-Damari had killed by mistake. All of that was in 
accordance with the clauses of the treaty that both parties had already signed. On 
hearing his story they said they would share in paying the blood-money and asked 
him and his Companions Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, ‘Ali and others to sit under a wall of their 
houses and wait. The Jews held a short private meeting and conspired to kill the 
Prophet [pbuh]. The most wicked among them, ‘Amr bin Jahsh, volunteered to climb 
up the wall and drop a large millstone on his head. One of them, Salam bin 
Mashkam, cautioned them against perpetrating such a crime, predicting that Allâh 
would divulge their plot to him, and added that such an act would constitute a 
manifest violation of the pact concluded with the Muslims. 
In fact, Gab