The Defence Plan 
The Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] mobilized his army. He arranged them into two rows 
to prepare them for fight. He selected fifty skillful archers that formed a squad and 
made them under the command of ‘Abdullah bin Jubair bin An-Nu‘man Al-Ansari Al-
Awsi Al-Badri. He issued his orders to them to stay where they were — on a 
mountain(side) at the south bank of Qanat Al-Wadi (i.e. a canal of the valley), south 
east of Muslims camp at about one hundred and fifty metres from the Islamic army. 
Later on this mountain was called the Mountain of Archers. 
The Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] clarified the mission of this squad in words he 
directed to them. He said to their leader: "Drive off the horses from us by means of 
arrows, lest they should attack us from behind (the rear). Whether we win the battle 
or lose it, stand steadily in your position and mind that we are not attacked from 
your side."[Ibn Hisham 2/65,66] 
He added: 
"Defend our backs! If you see us slain. Do not come to assist us; and if you 
see gaining grounds, do not share us."[Fath Al-Bari 7/350] 
In a version by Al-Bukhâri the Prophet [pbuh] said: 
"If you see us snatched into pieces by birds, do not leave this position of 
yours till I send for you. And if you see that we have defeated the enemy 
and trodden on them do not desert your position till I send for you."[Sahih 
Al-Bukhari, the Book of Jihad 1/426] 
With the assignment of this squad and locating it on the mountainside and the 
issuance of those strict military orders, the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] blocked the 
only groove that might lead the idolaters stealthily to the rear of Muslim ranks and 
might even enable them to encircle them in an encompassment procedure. 
The assignments of posts and responsibilities for the rest of the army were 
performed by the Prophet [pbuh] as follows: On the right wing, he appointed Al-
Mundhir bin ‘Amr. On the left he appointed Az-Zubair bin Al-‘Awwam, and made Al-
Miqdad bin Al-Aswad his assistant and supporter. Az-Zubair’s function was to 
standfast in the face of Khalid bin Al-Waleed’s horsemen. The Messenger of Allâh 
[pbuh] selected the top and the most courageous group to be in the vanguard of the 
army. They were notable for their readiness, alertness and bravery and estimated to 
be equal to thousands of men. 
It was a wise and carefully-laid plan which revealed the genius of military leadership 
that the Prophet [pbuh] possessed. No other leader could have drawn a more 

161
accurate or wise plan. Although he approached the site later than the enemy, he 
managed to occupy better positions. He made the rocky mountainside to function as 
shield for the army’s rear and right flank. He was able, by blocking the only 
vulnerable gap on the side, to provide additional maximum protection for the rear as 
well as the left wing. For fear of possible defeat, and to deter the Muslims from 
fleeing, in which case they would fall easy prisoners in the hands of the enemy, he 
chose a high place for encampment. Moreover a strategic site of this sort would 
surely inflict heavy losses on the polytheists if they thought of approaching or 
occupying his positions. In a further step, he reduced the enemy to a narrow scope 
of choice when they were cornered for encampment in geographically low positions 
that would avail them nothing of the benefits of any possible victory; at the same 
time they would not be able to escape the pursuit of the Muslims in case victory 
sided with the latter. To make up for the quantitative shortage in fighting personnel, 
he chose a picked body of fighters to stand at the front. 
Th