'ad 1/18] 
Proclaiming All? , the All-High; and the Immediate Constituents 
The first Revelation sent to the Prophet [pbuh] implied several injunctions, simple in 
form but highly effective and of serious far-reaching ramifications. The angel 
communicated to him a manifest Message saying:  
"O you (Muhammad [pbuh]) enveloped (in garments)! Arise and warn! And 
your Lord (All? ) magnify! And your garments purify! And keep away from 
Ar-Rujz (the idols). And give not a thing in order to have more (or consider 
not your deeds of All? ’s obedience as a favour to All? ). And be patient for 
the sake of your Lord (i.e. perform your duty to All? )!" [Al-Qur'an 74:1-7] 
For convenience and ease of understanding, we are going to segment the Message 
into its immediate constituents:  
1. The ultimate objective of warning is to make sure that no one breaching the 
pleasures of All?  in the whole universe is ignorant of the serious 
consequences that his behaviour entails, and to create a sort of 
unprecedented shock within his mind and heart. 
2. ‘Magnifying the Lord’ dictates explicitly that the only pride allowed to nourish 
on the earth is exclusively All? ’s to the exclusion of all the others’. 
3. ‘Cleansing the garments and shunning all aspects of abomination’ point 
directly to the indispensable need to render both the exterior and interior 
exceptionally chaste and pure, in addition to the prerequisite of sanctifying 
the soul and establishing it highly immune against the different sorts of 
impurities and the various kinds of pollutants. Only through this avenue can 
the soul of the Prophet [pbuh] reach an ideal status and become eligible to 
enjoy the shady mercy of All?  and His protection, security, guidance and 
ever-shining light; and will consequently set the highest example to the 
human community, attract the sound hearts and inspire awe and reverence in 
the stray ones in such a manner that all the world, in agreement or 
disagreement, will head for it and take it as the rock-bed in all facets of their 
welfare. 

47
4. The Prophet [pbuh] must not regard his strife in the way of All?  as a deed of 
grace that entitles him to a great reward. On the contrary, he has to exert 
himself to the utmost, dedicate his whole efforts and be ready to offer all 
sacrifices in a spirit of self-forgetfulness enveloped by an ever-present 
awareness of All? , without the least sense of pride in his deeds or sacrifices. 
5. The last verse of the Qur’?  revealed to the Prophet [pbuh] alludes to the 
hostile attitude of the obdurate disbelievers, who will jeer at him and his 
followers. They are expected to disparage him and step up their malice to the 
point of scheming against his life and lives of all the believers around him. In 
this case he has got to be patient and is supposed to persevere and display 
the highest degree of stamina for the sole purpose of attaining the pleasure of 
All? .  
These were the basic preliminaries that the Prophet [pbuh] had to observe, very 
simple injunctions in appearance, greatly fascinating in their calm rhythm, but highly 
effective in practice. They constituted the trigger that aroused a far-ranging tempest 
in all the corners of the world. 
The verses comprise the constituents of the new call and propagation of the new 
faith. A warning logically implies that there are malpractices with painful 
consequences to be sustained by the perpetrators, and since the present life is not 
necessarily the only room to bring people to account for their misdeeds or some of 
them, then the warning would necessarily imply calling people to account on another 
day, i.e. the Day of Resurrection, and this per se suggests the existence of a life 
other than this one we are living. All the verses of the Noble Qur’?  call people to 
testify explicitly to the Oneness of All? , to delegate all their affairs to All? , the All-
High, and to subordinate the desires of the self and the desires of All? ’s servants to 
the attainment of His P