282
A Meditation on the Ghazawat  
Meditation on the Prophet’s Ghazawat, missions, and the battalions he formed and 
dispatched, will certainly give us and everybody a true and clear impression that the 
Prophet [pbuh] was the greatest military leader in the whole world as well as the 
most righteous, the most insightful and the most alert one. He was not a man of 
superior genius for this concern but he was also the Master and the greatest of all 
Messengers as far as Prophethood and Heavenly Message are concerned. Besides, all 
the battles that he had fought were standard in their application to the requirements 
of strictness, bravery, and good arrangements that fitted the terms and conditions of 
war. None of the battles he fought was lost as a consequence of shortage of wisdom 
or due to any other technical error in army mobilization or a location in a wrong 
strategical position. The loss of any of his battle was not due to misjudgement about 
occupying the best and the most appropriate sites of battles, nor was it due to a 
mischoice of leaders of the fight, for he had proved himself to be a peculiar sort of 
leader that differs from any of those leaders that our world had known and 
experienced. As regards Uhud and Hunain events, there were consequences of 
weakness in some military elements in Hunain; and disobedience to orders in Uhud. 
Their non-compliance with wisdom and the plan of the battle played a passive role in 
the course of those two invasions. 
His genius was clearly shown in these two battles when the Muslims were defeated; 
for he stoodfast facing the enemy and managed, by his super wisdom, to thwart the 
enemy’s aim as was the case in Uhud. Similarly he managed to change the Muslims’ 
defeat in Hunain into a victory. Nothwithstanding the fact that serious grave 
developments in military operations usually leave the worst impression on the 
military leaders and entice them to flee for their lives. 
We have, so far, discussed the mere aspects of military leadership of the invasions. 
On the other hand, through these invasions he was able to impose security, institute 
peace, diffuse dissension and destroy the military might of the enemies through 
relentless struggle between Islam and paganism. 
The Prophet had also profound insight and could differentiate the faithful from the 
hypocrites and plotters. 
Great was the group of military leaders who fought and excelled the Persians and the 
Byzantines in the battlefields of Ash-Sham and Iraq with respect to war strategy and 
leading the fight procedures. The very leaders, who succeeded Muhammad [pbuh] , 
managed to drive off the enemies of Islam, from their lands and countries, their 
gardens and springs, and their farms. They drove them off their honourable 
residence and from the grace and provisions they owned and enjoyed. Those Muslim 
leaders were all Muhammad’s men. They were imbued with the spirit of Islam at the 
hand of the Prophet [pbuh]. 
Thanks to these battles, the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] managed accommodation, 
secured land and provided chances of work for all Muslims. He, even, made a lot of 
inquiries about the refugee problems who (then) had no houses or fortunes. He 
equipped the army with weapons, horses and expenditures. He had all that realized 
without exercising a particle weight of injustice. The Prophet [pbuh] has altered the 
standards and aims of pre-Islamic wars. Their war was no more than robbing, killing, 
plundering, tyranny and aggression-oriented wars. Those wars focused on winning 

283
victory, oppressing the weakling and demolishing their houses and constructions. For 
them, war was a means by which they can rape or unveil women, practise cruelty 
against the weakling, the babies and small children, spoil tillage and race, and 
spread corruption on the earth. Islamic wars are different from pre-Islamic wars. A 
"war" in Islam is a Jihad. That is to say it is a noble sacred fight in the way of Allâh 
for the verification of a Muslim society that seeks to free man from oppression, 
tyranny and aggression. It is a society that everyone everywhere and at all times 
should be proud of.Pre-Islamic thoughts and traditions of Al-Jahiliyah period have 
been turned upside down by Islam. These were so hard upon the weakling that they 
had to invoke Allâh to enable them to get away from that pre-Islamic environment 
by saying: 
"Our Lord, rescue us from this town whose people are oppressors, and raise 
for us from You one who will protect, and raise for us from You one who will 
help."  
The war of corruption, slaying and robbing that used to prevail has now turned into a 
sacred one, Al-Jihad. One of the greatest aims of Al-Jihad is to free man from the 
aggression, the oppression and the tyranny of men of power. A man of power, in 
Islam, is a weakling till after the right of the poor is taken from him. War, in Islam, is 
a Jihad for the purification of the land of Allâh from deception, treachery, sinful 
deeds and aggression. It is a sacred war that aims at spreading security, safety, 
mercy and compassion as well as observing the rights and magnanimity. The 
Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] had issued honourable strict rules about war and bade his 
soldiers and leaders to comply with them. They were forbidden to break those rules 
under any circumstances. In reference to Sulaiman bin Buraidah’s version, who said 
that his father had told him that whenever the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] appointed 
a leader on an army or on a battalion, he used to recommend him to fear Allâh, the 
Great and All-Mighty, when dealing with those who were closest to him and to be 
good with all Muslims. Then the Prophet [pbuh] would say to him: 
"Let your invasion be in the Name of Allâh and for His sake. Fight those who 
disbelieve in Allâh. Invade but do not exaggerate nor commit treachery. 
Never deform the corpse of a dead person or kill an infant child."  
The Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] asked people to facilitate but he forbade them to bear 
down hard on others or constrain. "Pacify", he said, "and do not disincline". [Sahih 
Muslim 2/82,83] When it happened that he arrived at the battlefield by night, he 
would never invade the enemy till it was morning. He utterly forbade burning (i.e. 
torturing people) in fire, killing children and women or even beating them. He also 
forbade theft and robbery and proceeded so far as to say gains acquired through 
plundering are not less forbidden than the flesh of a corpse. Corruption of tillage and 
race and cutting down of trees were all forbidden unless they were badly needed and 
there was no other substitute: 
"Do not kill a wounded person nor run after a fleeing one or kill a captive." 
He decreed that envoys cannot be killed. He also stressed on not killing those who 
made covenants. He even said: 

284
"He whoever kills one who is under pledge to a covenant shall not smell 
Paradise, though its smell could be experienced at a forty-year distance 
from it." 
There were some other noble rules which purified wars from their Al-Jahiliyah (pre-