the Prophet [pbuh] delegated Muhammad bin Maslamah to communicate 
an ultimatum to Bani Nadeer to the effect that they should evacuate Madinah within 
ten days, otherwise, their heads would be cut off. The chief of the hypocrites, 
‘Abdullah bin Ubai, urged the Jews not to pay heed to the Prophet [pbuh]’s words 
and to stay in their habitations, offering to run to their support with two thousands of 
his followers, and assuring them of help to come from Quraizah tribe and former 
allies Banu Ghatfan. In this regards, Allâh says: 
"If you are expelled, we (too) indeed will go out with you, and we shall 
never obey anyone against you, and if you are attacked (in fight), we shall 
indeed help you." [Al-Qur'an 59:11] 
The Jews regained their confidence and were determined to fight. Their chief Huyai 
bin Akhtab relied hopefully on what the chief of the hypocrites said. So he sent to the 
Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] saying: "We will not leave our houses. Do whatever you 
like to do." 
Undoubtedly the situation was awkward for the Muslims. Launching a war against 
their opponents at this critical stage could entail terrible far reaching ramifications in 
the light of the unfavourable conditions they were passing through, besides the 
hostile environment growing in power and hatred around them, the harbinger of 
which assumed the form of killing the Muslim missions, as it has been already 
introduced. 
The Jews of Bani Nadeer were also a power to count for, and the prospects of 
inflicting a military defeat on them was precarious; consequently forcing them into 
war engagement would be attended with unpredictable risks. On the other hand, the 
continual state of repeated assassinations and acts of treachery carried out against 
the Muslims individually and collectively brought about unbearable headache to 
Muhammad [pbuh]’s followers. Having judged all the prevalent status quo in this 
perspective, and in the light of the disgraceful attempt on the life of the Prophet 
[pbuh], the Muslims made the decisive decisions of taking up arms whatever turn 
the consequences could assume. 

191
When the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] received the reply of Huyai bin Akhtab he said: 
"Allâhu Akbar, Allâhu Akbar." (Allâh is the Greatest of all) and his Companions 
repeated after him. Then he set out to fight them after appointing Ibn Umm Maktum 
to dispose the affairs of Madinah during his absence. The standard was entrusted to 
‘Ali bin Abi Talib. He laid siege to their forts for six nights — in another version, 
fifteen. 
Banu Nadeer resorted to their castles, mounted them and started shooting arrows 
and pelting stones at the Muslims enjoying the strategic advantage that their thick 
fields of palm trees provided. The Muslims were therefore ordered to fell and burn 
those trees. In this respect, Allâh, the All-Mighty, states in the Qur’ân: 
"What you (O Muslims) cut down of the palm-trees (of the enemy), or you 
left them standing on their stems, it was by leave of Allâh." [Al-Qur'an 59:5] 
Quraizah tribe remained neutral, and the hypocrite ‘Abdullah bin Ubai as well as 
Ghatfan failed to keep their promises of support. In this regard Allâh says: 
"(Their allies deceived them) like Satan, when he says to man: ‘Disbelieve in 
Allâh.’ But when (man) disbelieves in Allâh, Satan says: ‘I am free of you.’" 
[Al-Qur'an 59:16] 
The siege did not last long for Allâh, the All-Mighty, cast horror into the hearts of the 
Jews, and they willingly offered to comply with the Prophet [pbuh]’s order and leave 
Madinah. The Prophet [pbuh] accepted their request and allowed them to carry as 
much luggage as their camels could lift, arms were excepted. Of course, they had no 
choice but to carry out the orders, so they took with them everything they could 
carry even the pegs and beams of ceilings. Their caravan counted 600 loaded camels 
including their chiefs, Huyai bin Akhtab and Salam bin Abi Al-Huqaiq, who left for 
Khaibar whereas another party shifted to Syria. Two of them embraced Islam, 
Yameen bin ‘Amr and Abu Sa‘d bin Wahab, and so they retained their personal 
wealth. 
The Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] seized their weapons, land, houses, and wealth. 
Amongst the other booty he managed to capture, there were 50 armours, 50 
helmets, and 340 swords. 
This booty was exclusively the Prophet [pbuh]’s because no fighting was involved in 
capturing it. He divided the booty at his own discretion among the early Emigrants 
and two poor Helpers, Abu Dujana and Suhail bin Haneef. Anyway the Messenger of 
Allâh [pbuh] spent a portion of this wealth on his family to sustain their living the 
year around. The rest was expended to provide the Muslim army with equipment for 
further wars in the way of Allâh. 
The invasion of Bani An-Nadeer took place in Rabi‘ Al-Awwal, 4 A.H. i.e. in August 
625 A.D. Almost all the verses of Sûrah Al-Hashr (Chapter 59 - The Gathering) 
describe the banishment of the Jews and reveal the disgraceful manners of the 
hypocrites. The verses manifest the rules relevant to the booty. In this Chapter, 
Allâh, the All-Mighty, praises the Emigrants and Helpers. This Chapter al