4. The party continued its journey until it reached to solitary tents belonging to a 
woman called Umm Ma‘bad Al-Khuza‘iyah. She was a gracious lady who sat at 
her tent-door with a mat spread out for any chance traveller that might pass 
by the way. Fatigued and thirsty, the Prophet [pbuh] and his companions 
wanted to refresh themselves with food and some milk. The lady told them 
that the flock was out in the pasture and the goat standing nearby was almost 
dry. It was a rainless year. The Prophet [pbuh], with her permission, touched 
its udders, reciting over them the Name of Allâh, and to their great joy, there 
flowed plenty of milk out of them. The Prophet [pbuh] first offered that to the 
lady of the house, and he shared what was left with the members of the 
party. Before he left, he milked the goat, filled the container and gave it to 
Umm Ma‘bad. Later on, her husband arrived with slender goats hardly having 
any milk in their udders. He was astonished to see milk in the house. His wife 
told him that a blessed man passed by the way, and then she gave details 
about his physical appearance and manner of talk. Here Abu Ma‘bad realized 
on the spot that the man was the one whom Quraish were searching for and 
asked her to give full description of him. She gave a wonderful account of his 
physique and manners, to which we will go in detail later in the process of 
talking about his attributes and merits.  
Abu Ma‘bad, after listening to his wife’s account, expressed a sincere wish to 
accompany the Prophet [pbuh] whenever that was possible, and reiterated his 
admiration in verses of poetry that echoed all over Makkah to such an extent 
that the people therein thought it was a jinn inculcating words in their ears. 
Asma’, daughter of Abu Bakr, on hearing those lines, got to know that the 
two companions were heading for Madinah .[Za'd Al-Ma'ad 2/54] The short poem 
opened with thanks giving to Allâh having given them (the Ma‘bads) the 
chance to host the Prophet [pbuh] for a while. It then gave an account of the 
bliss that would settle in the heart of the Prophet’s companion whosoever he 
was; it closed with an invitation to all mankind to come and see by 
themselves Umm Ma‘