d replied positively 
swearing that she would not have come to take an oath of allegiance if she had had 
the least seed of disobedience to him. On returning home, she broke her idol 
admitting her delusion as regards stone-gods. 
The Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] stayed in Makkah for 19 days. During that period he 
used to define the way to Islam, guide people to the orthodox path. He ordered Abu 
Usaid Al-Khuza‘i to restore the pillars of the Holy Sanctuary, sent missions to all 
quarters inviting them to adopt Islam and break down the graven images still lying in 
the vicinity of Makkah, and he did have all of them scrapped, inculcating in the 
believers’ ears his words: 
"Whoever believes in Allâh and the Hereafter is supposed to scrap out the 
idols that should happen to be in his house." 
Shortly after the great conquest, the Prophet [pbuh] began to despatch platoons and 
errands aiming at eliminating the last symbols reminiscent of pre-Islamic practices. 
He sent Khalid bin Al-Waleed in Ramadan 8 A.H. to a spot called Nakhlah where 
there was a goddess called Al-‘Uzza venerated by Quraish and Kinanah tribes. It had 
custodians from Bani Shaiban. Khalid, at the head of thirty horsemen arrived at the 
spot and exterminated it. On his return, the Prophet [pbuh] asked him if he had seen 
anything there, to which Khalid gave a negative answer. Here, he was told that it 
had not been destroyed and he had to go there again and fulfill the task. He went 
back again and there he saw a black woman, naked with torn hair. Khalid struck her 
with his sword into two parts. He returned and narrated the story to the Prophet 
[pbuh], who then confirmed the fulfillment of the task. 
Later, in the same month, ‘Amr bin Al-‘As was sent on an errand to destroy another 
idol, venerated by Hudhail, called Suwa‘. It used to stand at a distance of three 
kilometres from Makkah. On a question posed by the door-keeper, ‘Amr said he had 
been ordered by the Prophet [pbuh] to knock down the idol. The man warned ‘Amr 
that he would not be able to do it. ‘Amr was surprised to see someone still in the 
wrong, approached the idol and destroyed it, then he broke the casket beside it but 
found nothing. The man immediately embraced Islam. 
Sa‘d bin Zaid Al-Ashhali was also sent in the same month and on the same mission 
to Al-Mashallal to destroy an idol, Manat, venerated by both Al-Aws and Al-Khazraj 
tribes. Here also a black woman, naked with messy hair appeared wailing and 
beating on her chest. Sa‘d immediately killed her, destroyed the idol and broke the 
casket and returned at the conclusion of his errand. 
Khalid bin Al-Waleed at the head of 350 horsemen of Helpers, Emigrants and Bani 
Saleem was despatched once again in the same year 8 A.H. to the habitation of Bani 
Khuzaimah bedouins to invite them to the fold of Islam. He was instructed to carry 
out his mission with peace and goodwill. There, the people were not articulate 
enough to communicate their intentions, so Khalid ordered his men to kill them and 
take the others as captives. He even had in mind to kill the captives but some of the 
Companions were opposed to his plan. News of bloodshed reached the Prophet 
[pbuh]. He was deeply grieved and raised his hands towards the heaven, uttering 

257
these words: "O Allâh! I am innocent of what Khalid has done," twice. [Sahih Al-
Bukhari 1/450, 2/622] He immediately sent ‘Ali to make every possible reparation to 
the tribes who had been wronged. After a careful inquiry, ‘Ali paid the blood-money 
to all those who suffered loss. The remaining portion was also distributed amongst 
the members of the tribe in order to alleviate their suffering. Khalid, due to his 
irrational behaviour, had a row with ‘Abdur Rahman bin ‘Awf. Hearing this, the 
Prophet [pbuh] got angry, and ordered Khalid to stop that altercation adding that his 
Companions (meaning ‘Abdur Rahman bin ‘Awf) were too high in rank to be involved 
in such arguments. 
That is the story of the conquest of Makkah and the decisive battle that exterminated 
paganism once and for all. The other tribes in the Arabian Peninsula were waiting 
and closely watching the final outcome of the bitter struggle between the Muslims 
and idolaters, already convinced that the Holy Sanctuary would not fall but in the 
hands of the righteous party. It had been a conviction deeply established in their 
minds ever since the elephant army of Abraha Al-Ashram advanced from Yemen 
intending to destroy the Sacred House 50 years before. 
Al-Hudaibiyah Peace Treaty was the natural prelude to this great victory in which 
people believed deeply and over which people talked a lot. The Muslims in Makkah, 
who had feared to declare their Faith in public, began to appear and work ardently 
for this new approach of life. People began to convert into Islam in hosts, and the 
Muslim army that numbered 3000 only in the previous Ghazwah, now came to reach 
10,000 in number. In fact, this decisive change provided people with the keen insight 
to perceive things and the world around them as a whole in a different perceptive. 
The Muslims were then to steer the whole political and religious affairs of all Arabia. 
They had monopolised both the relig