The Invasion of Tabuk and its Far-Reaching Ramifications 
The effect of this invasion is great as regards extending and confirming the Muslims’ 
influence and domination on the Arabian Peninsula. It was quite obvious to 
everybody that no power but Islam’s would live long among the Arabs. The 
remainders of Jahiliyin and hypocrites — who used to conspire steadily against the 
Muslims and who perpetually relied on Byzantine power when they were in need of 
support or help — these people lost their expectations and desires of ever reclaiming 
their ex-influence. Realizing that there was no way out and that they were to submit 
to the fait accompli, they gave up their attempts. 
From that time on, hypocrites were no longer treated leniently or even gently by the 
Muslims. Allâh not only bade Muslims to treat them severely but He also forbade 
them to take their gift charities or perform prayer on their dead, or ask Allâh’s 

280
forgiveness for them or even visit their tombs. Allâh bade the Muslims to demolish 
the mosque, which they verily appointed and used as a hiding place where they 
might practise their plots, conspiracy and deceit. Some Qur’ânic verses were sent 
down disclosing them publicly and utterly so that everybody in Madinah got to know 
their reality. 
The great impact that this invasion produced could be perceived in of the great 
number of delegations who came successively to meet the Messenger of Allâh 
[pbuh]. Naturally, deputations used to come to meet him at the end of an invasion 
particularly after Makkah Conquest [Ibn Hisham 2/515-537; Za'd Al-Ma'ad 3/2-13; 
Sahih Al-Bukhari 2/633,635-637, 1/252, 414; Fath Al-Bari 8/110-126; Mukhtasar 
Seerat Ar-Rasool p.391-407] but they were not as many as these nor were they as 
frequent as they were then in the wake of Tabuk event. It was certainly the greatest. 
  The Qur’ânic Verses Relating to this Invasion 
Many a verse of Bara’a (Tauba) Chapter handling the event of Tabuk were revealed. 
Some verses were revealed before the march, while others after setting out for 
Tabuk, i.e. in the context of the battle. Some other verses were also revealed on the 
Prophet’s arrival in Madinah. All of which covered the incidents that featured this 
invasion: the immanent circumstances of the battle, exposure of the hypocrites, the 
prerogatives and special rank earmarked for the strivers in the cause of Allâh, 
acceptance of the repentance of the truthful believers who slackened and those who 
hung back, etc. 
Some Important Events that featured that Year 
During this year many events of great significance took place. They were: 
1. After the Messenger’s return from Tabuk, the sworn allegation of infidelity [In 
case of an infidelity accusation that lacks evidence, both husband and wife 
swear by Allah that they are innocent and did not commit infidelity. The 
Husband invokes Allah's curses on himself if he is lying and the women 
invokes Allah's wrath on her if she is lying] between ‘Uwaimir Al-‘Ajlani and 
his wife took place. 
2. Pelting with stones the Ghamidiyah woman who confessed committing 
adultery. She was pelted with stones only after weaning her child off her 
breast milk. 
3. Negus Ashama; the king of Abyssinia (Ethiopia), died so the Prophet [pbuh] 
performed prayer in absentia for him. 
4. The death of Umm Kulthum, the daughter of the Prophet [pbuh], the Prophet 
felt extremely sad at her death. "Had I got a third daughter, I would let you 
marry her." He said to ‘Uthman. 
5. The death of ‘Abdullah bin Abi Salool, the head of hypocrites, after the 
Prophet’s return from Tabuk. The Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] asked Allâh’s 
forgiveness for him. He also prayed for him in spite of ‘Umar’s disapproval 
and his attempt to prevent him from doing tha