ssembles Bani Hashim and Bani Al-Muttalib 
The new and welcome changes notwithstanding, Abu Talib still had a deep sensation 
of fear over his nephew. He deliberated on the previous series of incidents including 
the barter affair of ‘Amarah bin Al-Waleed, Abu Jahl’s rock, ‘Uqbah’s attempt to 
choke the Prophet [pbuh] , and finally ‘Umar’s (before conversion) intention to kill 

74
Muhammad [pbuh] . The wise man understood that all of these unequivocally 
smacked of a serious plot being hatched to disregard his status as a custodian of the 
Prophet [pbuh] , and kill the latter publicly. In the event of such a thing, Abu Talib 
deeply believed, neither ‘Umar nor Hamzah would be of any avail, socially powerful 
though they were. [Ibn Hisham 1/269; Mukhtasar Seerat Ar-Rasool p.106] 
Abu Talib was right. The polytheists had laid a carefully-studied plan to kill the 
Prophet [pbuh] , and banded together to put their plan into effect. He, therefore, 
assembled his kinsfolk of Bani Hashim and Bani Al-Muttalib, sons of ‘Abd Munaf and 
exhorted them to immunize and defend his nephew. All of them, whether believers 
or disbelievers, responded positively except his brother Abu Lahab, who sided with 
the idolaters.                                      

75
General Social Boycott 
Four events of special significance occurred within less than four weeks — the 
conversion of Hamzah, the conversion of ‘Umar, Muhammad’s [pbuh] refusal to 
negotiate any sort of compromise and then the pact drawn up between Banu 
Muttalib and Banu Hashim to immunize Muhammad [pbuh] and shield him against 
any treacherous attempt to kill him. The polytheists were baffled and at a loss as to 
what course they would follow to rid themselves of this obstinate and relentless 
obstacle that had appeared to shatter to pieces their whole tradition of life. They had 
already been aware that if they killed Muhammad [pbuh] their blood would surely 
flow profusely in the valleys of Makkah and they would certainly be exterminated. 
Taking this dreadful prospect into consideration, they grudgingly resorted to a 
different iniquitous course that wou