ontribution of the Archers Squad to the Battle 
The archers squad whom the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] located on the Archers 
Mountain, had the upper hand in administering the war activities to go in favour of 
the Muslim army. The Makkan horsemen — commanded by Khalid bin Al-Waleed, 
supported by Abu ‘Amir Al-Fâsiq — had for three times attacked the left wing of the 
Muslim army with the aim of crushing it and then infiltrating into the rear to create a 
sort of confusion and disorder in the ranks of the Muslims and subsequently inflict 
heavy defeat on them. But thanks to the dexterity and great efforts of the archers, 
the three assaults were thwarted.[Fath Al-Bari 7/346] 
War activities went on and on fierecly with the Muslims in full command of the whole 
military developments until the idolaters finally staggered and retreated, leaving all 
motives of alleged pride, and affected dignity in oblivion, and their standard trodden 
by the feet of the fighters with none ever courageous enough to approach it. It 
seemed as if the three thousand idolaters had been fighting thirty thousand Muslims 
and not merely several hundreds. 

167
Ibn Ishaq said: "Then Allâh sent down His Help unto the Muslims and verified His 
Promise to them. They chased the idolaters and evacuated them from their camp. No 
doubt it was a certain defeat." In a version by ‘Abdullah bin Az-Zubair that his father 
had said: "By Allâh, I was watching the servants of Hind bint ‘Utbah and her women 
friends fleeing with their garments gathered up. No one was there to prevent us from 
capturing them."[Ibn Hisham 2/77] 
In another version by Al-Barâ’ bin ‘Azib — mentioned in Sahih Al-Bukhâri — he said: 
"When we fought them, they fled, and their women could be seen fleeing in the 
mountains with their anklets and legs revealed."[Sahih Al-Bukhari 2/579] The Muslims 
pursued the enemies putting them to sword and collecting the spoils.  
The Archers’ Fatal Mistake 
While the small army of Islam were recording the second absolute and clear victory 
over the Makkans — which was no less in splendour and glory than the first one at 
Badr — the majority of the archers on the mountainside committed a fatal mistake 
that turned the whole situation upside down, and constituted a source of heavy 
losses amongst the Muslims. It has almost brought about the murder of the Prophet 
[pbuh], and left a very bad impression on the fame and dignity they deservedly 
earned at Badr Battle. 
We have already spoken about the positive orders given to the archers to hold on to 
their position whatever the course of the main engagement. In spite of those strict 
orders, and their leader’s — ‘Abdullah bin Jubair — warning, forty archers deserted 
their posts, enticed by the too soon roar of victory as well as worldly avarice for the 
spoils of war.[Sahih Al-Bukhari 1/426] The others, however, nine in number and ‘Abdullah, 
their leader, decided to abide by the Prophet [pbuh]’s order and stay where they 
were until they were given leave or killed to the last. Consequently the cleft was left 
inadequately defended . 
The shrewd Khalid bin Al-Waleed seized this golden opportunity to turn swiftly round 
to the rear of the Muslim army and encompass them. Exterminating Ibn Jubair and 
his group, they fell promptly upon the rear of the Muslims and his horsemen uttered 
a shout that signalled the new military developments. The polytheists returned once 
again to counterattack the Muslims. An idolist woman — called ‘Umra bint ‘Alqama 
Al-Harithiyah — rushed to the lying-on-earth standard, picked it up and hoisted it. 
The idolaters gathered together around the standard and called out unto one another 
till they encircled the Muslims and stoodfast to fight again. 
The Mus