/442] 
After the negotiations concerning the conditions of allegiance had ended, and all of 
the audience were unanimously agreed to ratify it, two men of the early generation 
of converts who had embraced Islam in the eleventh and twelfth years rose to their 
feet to apprise the others of the serious step they were about to take so that they 
could give their pledge fully aware of the whole affair and consequently be ready for 
the sacrifice they were expected to make. Al ‘Abbas bin Ubada bin Nadlah, in this 
context, remarked: "O you people of Khazraj! Do you know the significance of the 
pact that you are entering into with this man? You are in fact avowing that you will 
fight against all and sundry. If you fear that your property will be at stake or the 
lives of your nobles will be endangered, then leave him now, because if you do this 
after the pledge, it will be degrading for you both in this world and the world to 
come. But if you think that you can carry out what you are called upon to do in spite 
of the loss of precious lives and property, then undertake this heavy responsibility, 
and I swear by Allâh, that herein lies the good of this world and that of the next." 

97
They replied, "We have already considered the loss of property and the murder of 
our notables, yet we pay him allegiance. But what is our reward if we observe all the 
items of this pact?" The Prophet replied: "Paradise is in store for you." Then they 
asked him to stretch out his hand, and they all stretched out their hands and took 
the pledge. Only at that time did As‘ad bin Zurarah come to realize the people’s 
readiness for sacrifice in the cause of Allâh. [Ibn Hisham 1/446] 
On the authority of Jabir, who said: "When we started to pay allegiance to the 
Prophet [pbuh], As‘ad bin Zurarah stood up and gave the following short address: 
"Take it easy people of Yathrib! We have not covered that long distance except 
because we have had deep belief that he (Muhammad [pbuh]) is the Messenger of 
Allâh. We are already convinced that following him entails departure from the pagan 
Arabs even if it were at the risk of our life. Should you preserve in this course, 
holdfast to it, and your great reward is placed in the Hand of Allâh, but if you are 
caught in fear, I admonish you to give it up just now, and then you would be more 
excusable by Allâh." [Musnad Ahmad] 
With respect to the two women, the pledge was taken orally for the Prophet [pbuh] 
had never shaken hands with a strange lady. [Muslim 2/131] 
The Prophet [pbuh] then asked the group to appoint twelve deputies to preach Islam 
to their people in Madinah, to shoulder the responsibility of implementing the articles 
of this pledge and to guide the respective men of their own tribes in matters relating 
to the propagation of Islam. The deputies elected were nine from Al-Khazraj: As‘ad 
bin Zurarah bin ‘Ads, Sa‘d bin Ar-Rabi‘ bin ‘Amr, ‘Abdullah bin Rawahah bin 
Tha‘labah, Rafi‘ bin Malik bin Al-‘Ajlan, Al-Bara’ bin Ma‘rur bin Sakhr, ‘Abdullah bin 
‘Amr bin Haram, ‘Ubadah bin As-Samit bin Qais, Sa‘d bin ‘Ubadah bin Dulaim and Al-
Mundhir bin ‘Amr bin Khunais. Three others were from Al-Aws: Usaid bin Hudair bin 
Sammak, Sa‘d bin Khaithamah bin Al-Harith and Rifa‘a bin ‘Abdul Mundhir bin 
Zubair. Once again, those twelve men were sworn to act as surety over the affairs of 
their people just as the Christ’s disci