dividuals 
In Dhul Qa‘dah, the tenth year of Prophethood, i.e. July 619, the Prophet [pbuh], 
returned to Makkah to resume his activities. The time for pilgrimage to Makkah was 
approaching so he hastened to introduce people both tribes and individuals to Islam 
and call upon them to embrace it, just as it was his practice since the fourth year of 
his Prophethood. 
On the authority of Az-Zuhri, of the tribes that Islam was introduced to, we could 
speak of Banu ‘Amir bin Sa‘sa‘ah, Muharib bin Khasfa, Fazarah, Ghassan, Murrah, 
Haneefah, Saleem, ‘Abs, Banu Nasr, Banu Al-Buka’, Kindah, Kalb, Al-Harith bin Ka‘b, 
Udhrah and people of Hadrmout. Islam was not introduced to them in one single 
year but rather repeatedly from the fourth year till the last pre-migration season of 
pilgrimage. They however, remained obdurate and none of them responded 
positively. [At-Tirmidhi; Mukhtasar Seerat Ar-Rasool p.149; Tareekh-e-Islam 1/125] 
The following is a resume of aspects relating to the Prophet’s appeals as regards the 
new faith he was preaching: 
1. He visited a sept of Banu Kalb known as Banu ‘Abdullah. He called them to 
Allâh’s Message and entreated them to accept it for the sake of Allâh Who had 
chosen a beautiful name for their father, but without avail. 
2. He called on Bani Haneefah in their habitation, but received very repugnant 
treatment. 
3. He addressed Bani ‘Amir bin Sa‘sa‘ah in their encampment, calling them to 
abandon idolatry and join him. One of them called Buhairah bin Firras, 
answered him back: "Should we give you allegiance and Allâh give you power 
over your opponents, will you give us right to inheritance and succeed you in 
power?" The Prophet replied: "The whole affair lies in Allâh’s Hands. He gives 
the power to whomever He desires." The man commented: "Do you expect us 
to incur the wrath and vengeance of the Arabs without the least hope of 
leadership? We can in fact readily dispense with your offers."  
When Banu ‘Amir returned to their habitations, they narrated the story to an elderly 
man who had lingered behind because he was too old. They told him, "A young man 
of Quraish of Bani ‘Abdul Muttalib, claiming that he is a Prophet, contacted us, asked 
for support and invited us to embrace his religion