am 1/20-36] 
Christianity had first made its appearance in Arabia following the entry of the 
Abyssinian (Ethiopian) and Roman colonists into that country. The Abyssinian 
(Ethiopian) colonization forces in league with Christian missions entered Yemen as a 
retaliatory reaction for the iniquities of Dhu Nawas, and started vehemently to 
propagate their faith ardently. They even built a church and called it Yemeni Al-
Ka‘bah with the aim of directing the Arab pilgrimage caravans towards Yemen, and 
then made an attempt to demolish the Sacred House in Makkah. All? , the Almighty, 
however did punish them and made an example of them – here and hereafter.   
[Tafheem-ul-Qur'an 6/297; Ibn Hisham 1/20-36] 
A Christian missionary called Fimion, and known for his ascetic behaviour and 
working miracles, had likewise infiltrated into Najran. There he called people to 
Christianity, and by virtue of his honesty and truthful devotion, he managed to 
persuade them to respond positively to his invitation and embrace Christianity. 
The principal tribes that embraced Christianity were Ghassan, Taghlib, Tai’ and some 
Himyarite kings as well as other tribes living on the borders of the Roman Empire. 
Magianism was also popular among the Arabs living in the neighbourhood of Persia, 
Iraq, Bahrain, Al-Ahs?#146; and some areas on the Arabian Gulf coast. Some 
Yemenis are also reported to have professed Magianism during the Persian 
occupation. 
As for Sabianism, excavations in Iraq revealed that it had been popular amongst 
Kaldanian folks, the Syrians and Yemenis. With the advent of Judaism and 
Christianity, however, Sabianism began to give way to the new religions, although it 
retained some followers mixed or adjacent to the Magians in Iraq and the Arabian 
Gulf. [Tareekh Ard Al-Qur'an 2/193-208] 

27
The Religious Situation
Such was the religious life of the Arabians before the advent of Islam. The role that 
the religions prevalent played was so marginal, in fact it was next to nothing. The 
polytheists, who faked Abrahamism, were so far detached from its precepts, and 
totally oblivious of its immanent good manners. They plunged into disobedience and 
ungodliness, and developed certain peculiar religious superstitions that managed to 
leave a serious impact on the religious and socio-political life in the whole of Arabia. 
Judaism turned into abominable hypocrisy in league with hegemony. Rabbis turned 
into lords to the exclusion of the Lord. They got involved in the practice of dictatorial 
subjection of people and calling their subordinates to account for the least word or 
idea. Their sole target turned into acquisition of wealth and power even if it were at 
the risk of losing their religion, or the emergence of atheism and disbelief. 
Christianity likewise opened its doors wide to polytheism, and got too difficult to 
comprehend as a heavenly religion. As a religious practice, it developed a sort of 
peculiar medley of man and God. It exercised no bearing whatsoever on the souls of 
the Arabs who professed it simply because it was alien to their style of life and did 
not have the least relationship with their practical life