ng unto Islam beyond Makkah 
In Shawwal [Tareekh-e-Islam 1/122] (in the last of May or in the beginning of June 
619 A.D.), ten years after receiving his mission from his Lord, the Prophet [pbuh] set 
out towards At-Ta’if, about 60 kilometres from Makkah, in the company of his freed 
slave Zaid bin Haritha inviting people to Islam. But contrary to his expectations, the 
general atmosphere was terribly hostile. He approached the family of ‘Umair, who 
were reckoned amongst the nobility of the town. But, to his disappointment, all of 
them turned deaf ear to his message and used abusive language as regards the 
noble cause he had been striving for. Three brothers from the chieftains of Thaqeef 
—‘Abd Yaleel, Mas‘ud and Habeeb — sons of ‘Amr bin ‘Umair Ath-Thaqafy met the 
Prophet [pbuh], who invited them to embrace Islam and worship Allâh, but they 
impudently jeered at him and refused his invitation. "He is tearing the cloths of Al-
Ka‘bah; is it true that Allâh has sent you as a Messenger?" said one of them. "Has 
not Allâh found someone else to entrust him with His Message?" said the second. "I 
swear by Allâh that I will never have any contact with you. If you are really the 
Messenger of Allâh, then you are too serious to retort back; and if you are belying 
Allâh, then I feel it is imperative not to speak to." said the third. The Messenger of 
Allâh [pbuh], finding that they were hopeless cases, stood up and left them saying: 
"Should you indulge in these practices of yours, never divulge them to me." 
For ten days he stayed there delivering his message to several people, one after 
another, but all to no purpose. Stirred up to hasten the departure of the unwelcome 
visitor, the people hooted him through the alley-ways, pelted him with stones and 
obliged him to flee from the city pursued by a relentless rabble. Blood flowed down 
both his legs; and Zaid, endeavouring to shield him, was wounded in the head. The 
mob did not desist until they had chased him two or three miles across the sandy 
plains to the foot of the surrounding hills. There, wearied and exhausted, he took 
refuge in one of the numerous orchards, and rested against the wall of a vineyard. At 
a time when the whole world seemed to have turned against him, Muhammad 
[pbuh] turned to his Lord and betook himself to prayer and the following touching 
words are still preserved as those through which his oppressed soul gave vent to its 
distress. He was weary and wounded but confident of the help of his Lord: 
"O Allâh! To You alone I make complaint of my helplessness, the paucity of 
my resources and my insignificance before mankind. You are the most 
Merciful of the mercifuls. You are the Lord of the helpless and the weak, O 
Lord of mine! Into whose hands would You abandon me: into the hands of 
an unsympathetic distant relative who would sullenly frown at me, or to the 
enemy who has been given control over my affairs? But if Your wrath does 
not fall on me, there is nothing for me