ribing the same incident, Az-Zubair bin Al-‘Awwam said: "I saw Abu Dujana 
raising a sword over the parting part of Hind bint ‘Utba’s head then he moved it off. I 
said to myself: ‘Allâh and His Messenger know best.’ (i.e. know why he acted like 
that). [bn Hisham 2/69]"  
Hamzah bin ‘Abdul Muttalib displayed wonderful feats of gallantry against the 
overwhelming odds which stood unparalled and created consternation and confusion 
in the disbelieving hosts. Heroes dispersed off his way as if they had been tree-
leaves blown away by strong wind. In addition to his effective contribution to the 
annihilation of the idolaters who stood in defence of the standard, he was even of 
much greater effect at fighting against men of bravery and distinguished horsemen. 
It was Allâh’s Will that he be murdered when he was at the top. He was not killed in 
a face-to-face fight on the battlefield — in the normal way by which heroes die — but 
rather assassinated in the dead-dark as was the custom of killing generous and noble 
men that were impossible to kill in an honourable fight.  
Assassination of Asadullâh (the Lion of Allâh) Hamzah bin ‘Abdul Muttalib 
Hamzah’s assassin, Wahshi bin Harb, described how he killed Hamzah. He said: 
"I was a slave working to Jubair bin Mut‘im, whose paternal uncle Tu‘aimah bin ‘Adi 
was injured at Badr Battle. So when Quraish marched to Uhud, Jubair said to me: ‘If 
you kill Hamzah, the uncle of Muhammad, stealthily you shall be manumitted.’ " 
"So I marched with the people to Uhud." He used to describe himself as, "I am a 
picaro good at spearing." "So when the two parties fought, I set out seeking 
Hamzah. I saw him amidst people fighting. He was like a white and black striped 
camel, striking severely with his sword and no one could stand on his way. By Allâh! 
When I was getting ready and trying to seize the fit opportunity to spear him, hiding 
sometimes behind a tree or a rock hoping that he might draw nearer and be within 
range — at that moment I caught sight of Siba‘ bin ‘Abd Al-‘Uzza going closer 

166
towards him. When Hamzah observed him, he said: ‘Come on! O son of the ‘clitoris-
cutter.’ — for his mother used to be a circumciser. Then he struck one strong stroke 
that could hardly miss his head." 
Wahshi said: "Then I balanced my spear and shook it till I was content with it, then I 
speared him and it went down into his stomach and issued out between his legs. He 
attempted moving towards me but he was overcome by his wound. I left him there 
with the spear in his entrails till he died. Then I came to him, pulled out my spear 
and returned to the encampment place. I stayed there and did not go out, for he was 
the only one I sought. I only k