28
Aspects of Pre-Islamic Arabian Society 
After the research we have made into the religious and political life of Arabia, it is 
appropriate to speak briefly about the social, economic and ethical conditions 
prevalent therein.  
Social Life of the Arabs 
The Arabian Society presented a social medley, with different and heterogeneous 
social strata. The status of the woman among the nobility recorded an advanced 
degree of esteem. The woman enjoyed a considerable portion of free will, and her 
decision would most often be enforced. She was so highly cherished that blood would 
be easily shed in defence of her honour. In fact, she was the most decisive key to 
bloody fight or friendly peace. These privileges notwithstanding, the family system in 
Arabia was wholly patriarchal. The marriage contract rested completely in the hands 
of the woman’s legal guardian whose words with regard to her marital status could 
never be questioned. 
On the other hand, there were other social strata where prostitution and indecency 
were rampant and in full operation. Abu Da’? , on the authority of ‘Aishah [R] 
reported four kinds of marriage in pre-Islamic Arabia: The first was similar to 
present-day marriage procedures, in which case a man gives his daughter in 
marriage to another man after a dowry has been agreed on. In the second, the 
husband would send his wife – after the menstruation period – to cohabit with 
another man in order to conceive. After conception her husband would, if he desired, 
have a sexual intercourse with her. A third kind was that a group of less than ten 
men would have sexual intercourse with a woman. If she conceived and gave birth to 
a child, she would send for these men, and nobody could abstain. They would come 
together to her house. She would say: ‘You know what you have done. I have given 
birth to a child and it is your child’ (pointing to one of them). The man meant would 
have to accept. The fourth kind was that a lot of men would have sexual intercourse 
with a certain woman (a whore). She would not prevent anybody. Such women used 
to put a certain flag at their gates to invite in anyone who liked. If this whore got 
pregnant and gave birth to a child, she would collect those men, and a seeress would 
tell whose child it was. The appointed father would take the child and declare 
him/her his own. When Prophet Muhammad [pbuh] declared Islam in Arabia, he 
cancelled all these forms of sexual contacts except that of present Islamic marriage. 
[Abu Da'ud - The Book of marriage] 
Women always accompanied men in their wars. The winners would freely have 
sexual intercourse with such women, but disgrace would follow the children 
conceived in this way all their lives. 
Pre-Islam Arabs had no limited number of wives. They could marry two sisters at the 
same time, or even the wives of their fathers if divorced or widowed. Divorce was to 
a very great extent in the power of the husband. [Abu Da'ud - The Book of marriage] 
The obscenity of adultery prevailed almost among all social classes except few men 
and women whose self-dignity prevented them from committing such an act. Free 
women were in much better conditions than the female slaves who constituted the 
greatest calamity. It seemed that the greatest majority of pre-Islam Arabs did not 

29
feel ashamed of committing this obscenity. Abu Da’?  reported: A man stood up in 
front of Prophet Muhammad [pbuh] and said: "O Prophet of All? ! that boy is my son. 
I had sexual intercourse with his mother in the pre-Islamic period." The Pr