the Persian domain over Yemen. 
Rulership in Heerah 
Ever since Korosh the Great (557-529 B.C.) united the Persians, they ruled Iraq and 
its neighbourhood. Nobody could shake off their authority until Alexander the Great 
vanquished their king Dara I and thus subdued the Persians in 326 B.C. Persian 
lands were thenceforth divided and ruled by kings known as "the Kings of Sects", an 
era which lasted until 230 A.D. Meanwhile, the Qahtanians occupied some Iraqi 
territories, and were later followed by some ‘Adnanians who managed to share some 
parts of Mesopotamia with them. 
The Persians, under the leadership of Ardashir, who had established the Sasanian 
state in 226 A.D, regained enough unity and power to subdue the Arabs living in the 
vicinity of their kingdom, and force Quda‘a to leave for Syria , leaving the people of 
Heerah and Anbar under the Persian domain. 
During the time of Ardashir, Juzaima Alwaddah exercised rulership over Heerah, 
Rabi‘a and Mudar, and Mesopotamia. Ardashir had reckoned that it was impossible 
for him to rule the Arabs directly and prevent them from attacking his borders unless 
he appointed as king one of them who enjoyed support and power of his tribe. He 
had also seen that he could make use of them against the Byzantine kings who 
always used to harass him. At the same time, the Arabs of Iraq could face the Arabs 

16
of Syria who were in the hold of Byzantine kings. However, he deemed it fit to keep 
a Persian battalion under command of the king of Heerah to be used against those 
Arabs who might rebel against him. 
After the death of Juzaima around 268 A.D., ‘Amr bin ‘Adi bin Nasr Al-Lakhmi was 
appointed as king by the Persian King Sabour bin Ardashir. ‘Amr was the first of the 
Lakhmi kings who ruled Heerah until the Persians appointed Qabaz bin Fairuz in 
whose reign appeared someone called Mazdak, who called for dissoluteness in social 
life. Qabaz, and many of his subjects, embraced Mazdak’s religion and even called 
upon the king of Heerah, Al-Munzir bin Ma’ As-Sama’, to follow after. When the 
latter, because of his pride and self-respect, rejected their orders, Qabaz discharged 
him and nominated Harith bin