gration to Madinah could never be attributable to attempts to escape from jeers 
and oppression only, but it also constituted a sort of cooperation with the aim of 
erecting the pillars of a new society in a secure place. Hence it was incumbent upon 
every capable Muslim to contribute to building this new homeland, immunizing it and 
holding up its prop. As a leader and spiritual guide, there was no doubt the Noble 
Messenger [pbuh], in whose hands exclusively all affairs would be resolved. 
In Madinah, the Prophet [pbuh] had to deal with three distinctively different 
categories of people with different respective problems: 
1. His Companions, the noble and Allâh fearing elite [R]  
2. Polytheists still detached from the Islam and were purely 
Madinese tribes.  
3. The Jews.  
1. As for his Companions, the conditions of life in Madinah were totally different 
from those they experienced in Makkah. There, in Makkah, they used to strive 
for one corporate target, but physically, they were scattered, overpowered 
and forsaken. They were helpless in terms of pursuing their new course of 
orientation. Their means, socially and materially, fell short of establishing a 
new Muslim community. In parallel lines, the Makkan Chapters of the Noble 
Qur’ân were confined to delineating the Islamic precepts, enacting legislations 
pertaining to the believers individually and enjoining good and piety and 
forbidding evils and vices. 
In Madinah , things were otherwise; here all the affairs of their life rested in 
their hands. Now, they were at ease and could quite confidently handle the 
challenges of civilization, construction, means of living, economics, politics, 
government administration, war and peace, codification of the questions of 
the allowed and prohibited, worship, ethics and all the relevant issues. In a 
nutshell, they were in Madinah at full liberty to erect the pillars of a new 
Muslim community not only utterly different from that pre-Islamic code of life, 
but also distinctive in its features in the world at large. It was a society that 

110
could stand for the Islamic Call for whose sake the Muslims had been put to 
unspeakable tortures for 10 years. No doubt, the construction of a society 
that runs in line with this type of ethics cannot be accomplished overnight, 
within a month or a year. It requires a long time to build during which 
legislation and legalization will run gradually in a complementary process with 
mind cultivation, training and education. Allâh, the All-Knowing, of course 
undertook legislation and His Prophet Muhammad [pbuh], implementation 
and orientation: 
"He it is Who sent among the unlettered ones a Messenger 
(Muhammad [pbuh]) from among themselves, reciting to them His 
Verses, purifying them (from the filth of disbelief and polytheism), 
and teaching them the Book (this Qur’ân, Islamic laws and Islamic 
Jurisprudence) and Al-Hikmah (As-Sunna: legal ways, orders, acts of 
worship, etc. of the Prophet Muhammad [pbuh].)." [Al-Qur'an 62:2] 
The Prophet’s Companions [R] , rushed enthusiastically to assimilate these 
Qur’ânic rules and fill their hearts joyfully with them: 
"And when His Verses (this Qur’ân) are recited unto them, they (i.e. 
the Verses) increase their Faith." [Al-Qur'an 8:2] 
With respect to the Muslims, this task constituted the greatest challenge for 
the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh]. In fact, this very purpose lay at the heart of 
the Islamic Call and the Muhammadan mission; it was never an incidental 
issue though there were the matters that required urgent addressing. 
The Muslims in Madinah consisted virtually of two parties: The first one 
already settled down in their abode, land and wealth, fully at ease, but seeds 
of discord amongst them were deeply seated and chronic enmity continually 
evoked; they were Al-Ansar (the Helpers). The second party were Al-
Muhajirun (the Emigrants), homeless, jobless and penniless. Their number 
was not small, on the contrary, it was increasing day by day after the Prophet 
[pbuh] had given them the green light to leave for Madinah whose economic 
structure, originally not that prosperous one, began to show signs of 
imbalance aggravated by the economic boycott that the anti-Islamic groups 
i