and crush down their idolatrous practices.                        

52
The Second Phase: Open Preaching 
First Revelation regarding the Preaching 
"And warn your tribe (O Muhammad [pbuh]) of near kindred." [Al-Qur'an 26:214]. 
This was the first verse to be revealed in this concern. It is included in S? ah Ash-
Shu‘ar?/i> (Chapter 26 – The Poets) which relates the story of Moses [AWS] from his 
early days of Prophethood going through his migration with the Children of Israel, 
their escape from the Pharaoh and his folk, and the drowning Pharaoh and his hosts. 
This Chapter in fact narrates the different stages that Moses [AWS] passed through 
in his struggle with Pharaoh and the mission of calling his people unto All? . 
Moreover, it includes stories that speak about the terrible end in store for those who 
belied the Messengers such as the people of Noah, ‘Ad, Thamud, Abraham, Lout and 
Ahlul-Aikah (Companions of the Wood). (A group of people who used to worship a 
tree called Aikah) 
Chronologically, this Chapter belongs to the middle Makkan period, when the contact 
of the light of Prophecy with the cultural milieu of pagan Makkah was testing the 
Makkans in their most arrogant mood. The Message that this Chapter communicates 
is in brief: "The Truth is insurmountable. When the spirit of Prophecy came to 
Makkah, it was resisted by the votaries of evil; but Truth, unlike falsehood, is bound 
to stay, whereas falsehood is surely perishable." 
Calling the Closest Kinspeople 
In obedience to All? ’s Commands, Muhammad [pbuh] rallied his kinsmen of Bani 
Hashim with a group of Bani Al-Muttalib bin ‘Abd Munaf. The audience counted forty-
five men. 
Abu Lahab immediately took the initiative and addressed the Prophet [pbuh]: "These 
are your uncles and cousins, speak on to the point, but first of all you have got to 
know that your kinspeople are not in a position to withstand all the Arabs. Another 
point you have got to bear in mind is that your relatives are sufficient unto you. If 
you follow their tradition, it will be easier for them than to face the other clans of 
Quraish supported by the other Arabs. Verily, I have never heard of anyone who has 
incurred more harm on his kinspeople than you." The Messenger of All?  [pbuh] kept 
silent and said nothing in that meeting. 
He invited them to another meeting and managed to secure audience. He then stood 
up and delivered a short speech explaining quite cogently what was at stake. He 
said: "I celebrate All? ’s praise, I seek His help, I believe in Him, I put my trust in 
Him, I bear witness that there is no god to be worshipped but All?  with no associate. 
A guide can never lie to his people. I swear by All? , there is no god but He, that I 
have been sent as a Messenger to you, in particular and to all the people, in general. 
I swear by All?  you will die just as you sleep, you will be resurrected just as you 
wake up. You will be called to account for your deeds. It is then either Hell forever or 
the Garden (Paradise) forever." 

53
Abu Talib replied: "We love to help you, accept your advice and believe in your 
words. These are your kinspeople whom you have collected and I am one of them 
but I am the faste