ured the siege much longer because food 
and water were plentifully available and their strongholds were greatly fortified, 
whereas the Muslims were in the wild bare land suffering a lot from cold and hunger, 
let alone too much fatigue consequent on endless warfare operations that had 
started even before the battle of Confederates. Nevertheless, this was a battle of 
nerves, for Allâh had cast fear in the the Jews’ hearts, and their morale had almost 
collapsed especially when two Muslim heroes, ‘Ali bin Abi Talib and Az-Zubair bin 

202
‘Awwam [R]ã proceeded with ‘Ali swearing that he would never stop until he had 
either stormed their garrisons or been martyred like Hamza (a former Muslim 
martyr). 
In the light of this reluctance, they had nothing except to comply with the 
Messenger’s judgement. The Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] ordered that the men should 
handcuffed, and this was done under the supervision of Muhammad bin Salamah Al-
Ansari while the women and children were isolated in confinement. Thereupon Al-
Aws tribe interceded begging the Prophet [pbuh] to be lenient towards them. He 
suggested that Sa‘d bin Mu‘adh, a former ally, be deputed to give verdict about 
them, and they agreed. 
Sa‘d meanwhile stayed behind in Madinah due to a serious wound he sustained in 
the Confederates Battle. He was summoned and brought on a donkey. On his way to 
the Prophet [pbuh], the Jews used to exhort him to be lenient in his judgement on 
account of former friendship. Sa‘d remained silent but when they persisted he 
uttered: "It is time for Sa‘d not to be afraid of the blame of the blamers." On hearing 
this decisive attitude, some of them returned to Madinah waiting for a desperate 
doom. 
On arrival, he alighted with the help of some men. He was informed that the Jews 
had agreed to accept his verdict about them. He immediately wondered if his 
judgement would pass on all the people present, the Prophet [pbuh] included, 
turning his face away in honour of him. The reply was positive. 
He decided that all the able-bodied male persons belonging to the tribe should be 
killed, women and children taken prisoners and their wealth divided among the 
Muslim fighters. The Prophet [pbuh] accepted his judgement saying that Sa‘d had 
adjudged by the Command of Allâh. In fact, the Jews deserved that severe punitive 
action for the ugly treachery they had harboured against Islam, and the large 
arsenal they have amassed and which consisted of one thousand and five hundred 
swords, two thousand spears, three hundred armours and five hundred shields, all of 
which went into the hands of the Muslims. Trenches were dug in the bazaar of 
Madinah and a number of Jews between six and seven hundred were beheaded 
therein. Hot beds of intrigue and treachery were thus exterminated once and for all. 
Huyai, a chief criminal of war, a devil of Bani Nadir and Safiyah’s father, had joined 
the ranks of Banu Quraiza when Quraish and Ghatfan defected, was admitted into 
the audience of the Prophet [pbuh] with his hands tied to his neck with a rope. In 
audacious defiance, he declared obstinate enmity to the Prophet [pbuh] but admitted 
that Allâh’s Will was to be fulfilled and added that he was resigned to his fate. He 
was ordered to sit down, and was beheaded on