utdo 
Muhammad [pbuh].[Ibn Hisham 1/299,300,358; Tafheem-ul-Qur'an 4/8,9]. 
Ibn ‘Abbas [R] related that An-Nadr used to purchase songstresses who would 
through their bodily charms and songs entice away from Islam anyone 
developing the least attachment to the Prophet [pbuh]; in this regard, All?
 
says: 
"And of mankind is he who purchases idle talks (i.e. music, singing, etc.) to 
mislead (men) from the Path of All? ." [Al-Qur'an 31:6] [Tafheem-ul-Qur'an 
4/9] 
4. In a fresh attempt to dissuade Muhammad [pbuh] from his principled stand, 
Quraish invited him to compromise on his teachings and come to terms with 
their pre-Islamic practices in such a way that he quits some of his religion and 
the polytheists do the same. All? , the All-High says: 
5. "They wish that you should compromise (in religion out of courtesy) with 
them, so they (too) would compromise with you." [Al-Qur'an 68:9]. 
On the authority of Ibn Jareer and At-Tabarani, the idolaters offered that 
Muhammad [pbuh] worship their gods for a year, and they worship his Lord 
for a year. In another version, they said: "If you accept our gods, we would 
worship yours." Ibn Ishaq related that Al-Aswad bin Al-Muttalib, Al-Waleed 
bin Al-Mugheerah, Omaiyah bin Khalaf and Al-‘As bin Wa’il As-Sahmy, a 
constellation of influential polytheists, intercepted the Prophet [pbuh] while 
he was circumambulating in the Holy Sanctuary, and offered him to worship 
that they worshipped, and they worship that he worshipped so that, according 
to them, both parties would reach a common denominator. They added 
"Should the Lord you worship prove to be better than ours, then it will be so 
much better for us, but if our gods proved to be better than yours, then you 
would have benefit from it." All? , the Exalted, was decisive on the spot and 
revealed the following Chapter: 

59
 
"Say: "O Al-K? ir?  (disbelievers in All? , in His Oneness, in His Angels, in His 
Books, in His Messengers, in the Day of Resurrection, in Al-Qadar, etc.)! I 
worship not that which you worship, nor will you worship that which I 
worship. And I shall not worship that which you are worshipping, nor will you 
worship that which I worship. To you be your religion, and to me my religion 
(Islamic Monotheism). [Al-Qur'an 109] [Ibn Hisham 1/362]  
Persecutions 
At the beginning of the fourth year of the Call, and for a period of some months, the 
polytheists confined their harassment tactics to the above-mentioned ones. But on 
realizing the futility of these procedures, they decided to organize a full-scale 
opposition campaign. They called for a general meeting and elected a committee of 
twenty-five men of Quraish notables with Abu Lahab, the Prophet’s uncle, as a 
chairman. Following some lengthy deliberations, they reached a decisive decision to 
take measures deemed to stop the tidal wave of Islam through different channels. 
They were determined to spare no effort, in combatting the new faith. They decided 
to malign the Messenger of All?  [pbuh] and put the new converts to different sorts 
of torture using all available resources. It was easy to put the resolutions relating to 
the new converts who were deemed weak into effect. As for the Prophet [pbuh] , it 
was not easy to malign him because he had such gravity, magnanimity and 
matchless perfection of character that deterred even his enemies from committing 
any act of folly against him. He had, as well, Abu Talib, his uncle, who came from a 
noble