rongly fortified territory, studded with castles and farms, 
lying at a distance of 60-80 miles north of Madinah, now a village known for its 
uncongenial climate. After Al-Hudaibiyah Treaty, the major party of the anti-Islam 
tripartite coalition — Quraish, the bedouin horde of Najd tribes and the Jews — was 
neutralized, therefore, the Prophet [pbuh] deemed it an appropriate time to settle 
his affairs with the other two wings — the Jews and the Najd tribes — in order that 
peace and security could prevail and the Muslims may devote their time and effort in 
propagating the Message of Allâh and calling people to embrace it. Khaibar itself had 
always remained a hotbed of intrigue and conspiracy, and the Jews had always 
constituted it a source of military provocations and war instigation centre, so it was 
given a top priority on the agenda of the Prophet’s compelling exigencies. The Jews 
of Khaibar had united by an ancient alliance with the Confederates, triggered Bani 
Quraiza to practise treachery, maintained contacts with Ghatfan and the Arabians 
and they even devised an attempt at the Prophet’s life. In fact, the continual 
afflictions that the Muslims had sustained were primarily attributable to the Jews. 
Envoys were repeatedly sent to them for peaceful settlement, but all in vain. 
Consequently the Prophet [pbuh] came to the conclusion that a military campaign 
was a must in order to forestall their hostilities. 
Interpreters of the Noble Qur’ân suggest that capturing Khaibar had been a Divine 
promise implied in Allâh’s Words: 
"Allâh has promised you abundant spoils that you will capture, and He has 
hastened for you this." [Al-Qur'an 48:20] 
i.e., Al-Hudaibiyah Peace Treaty and the surrender of Khaibar. 
The hypocrites and people weak of heart had hung back from joining the true 
Muslims in Al-Hudaibiyah campaigns, so now Allâh, the All-Mighty inculcated the 
following words in His Prophet’s ears: 
"Those who lagged behind will say, when you set forth to take the spoils, 
‘Allow us to follow you.’ They want to change Allâh’s Words. Say: ‘You shall 
not follow us; thus Allâh has said beforehand.’ Then they will say: ‘Nay, you 
envy us.’ Nay, but they understand not except a little." [Al-Qur'an 48:15] 
For this reason, the Prophet [pbuh] invited only those who were willing to fight in the 
cause of Allâh to accompany him in his march against Khaibar. 1400 men only, who 
had sworn allegiance in response to his call. 
Meanwhile, Siba‘ bin ‘Arfatah Al-Ghifari was chosen to run the affairs of Madinah. 
Another incident of high significance is noteworthy, namely the Islamization of Abu 
Huraira, a venerable Muslim scholar and an authentic narrator of the Prophetic 
traditions. 
The hypocrites of Arabia took notice of the fresh Islamic intentions so they began to 
alert the Jews to the imminent military activities. Their chief, ‘Abdullah bin Ubai 

234
delegated an envoy to the Jews of Khaibar warning them against the dangers 
approaching, and nerving them to resist the Muslims as they outnumbered the latter 
and were better equipped. On hearing the news the Jews despatched Kinanah bin Abi 
Al-Huqaiq and Haudha bin Qais to their former allies, the tribe of Ghatfan requesting 
military assistance, promising to grant them half the yield of the fruit that their 
farms could yield if they managed to beat the Muslims. 
The Prophet marched by way of Isra Mountain and then went forward with the army 
till he halted in a valley called Ar-Raji‘, encamping between Khaibar and Ghatfan so 
as to prevent the latter from reinforcing the Jews. The guides accompanying him led 
him to an intersection from which branched out three roads with different 
designations; all leading to his destination. He abstained from following the first two 
roads on grounds of their ominous d