desired ‘Umar to see the nobles of Quraish on his behalf. ‘Umar excused himself on 
account of the personal enmity of Quraish; he had, moreover, no influential relatives 
in the city who could shield him from danger; and he pointed to ‘Uthman bin ‘Affan, 
who belonged to one of the most powerful families in Makkah, as the suitable envoy. 
‘Uthman went to Abu Sufyan and other chiefs and told them that the Muslims had 
come only to visit and pay their homage to the Sacred House, to do worship there, 
and that they had no intention to fight. He was also asked to call them to Islam, and 
give glad tidings to the believers in Makkah, women and men, that the conquest was 
approaching and Islam was surely to prevail because Allâh would verily establish His 
religion in Makkah. ‘Uthman also assured them that after the performance of 

215
ceremonies they would soon depart peacefully, but the Quraishites were adamant 
and not prepared to grant them the permission to visit Al-Ka‘bah. They, however, 
offered ‘Uthman the permission to perform the pilgrimage, if he so desired in his 
individual capacity, but ‘Uthman declined the offer saying: "How is it possible that I 
avail myself of this opportunity, when the Prophet [pbuh] is denied of it?" The 
Muslims anxiously waited for the arrival of ‘Uthman with mingled feelings of fear and 
anxiety. But his arrival was considerably delayed and a foul play was suspected on 
the part of Quraish. The Muslims were greatly worried and took a solemn pledge at 
the hand of the Prophet [pbuh] that they would sacrifice their lives to avenge the 
death of their Companion and stand firmly by their master, Muhammad [pbuh], 
under all conditions. This pledge goes by the name of Bay‘at Ar-Ridwan (a covenant 
of fealty). The first men to take a pledge were Abu Sinan Al-Asadi and Salamah bin 
Al-Akwa‘, who gave a solemn promise to die in the cause of Truth three times, at the 
front of the army, in the middle and in the rear. The Prophet [pbuh] caught his left 
hand on behalf of ‘Uthman. This fealty was sworn under a tree, with ‘Umar holding 
the Prophet’s hand and Ma‘qil bin Yasar holding a branch of the tree up. The Noble 
Qur’ân has referred to this pledge in the following words: 
"Indeed, Allâh was pleased with the believers when they gave their Bai‘a 
(pledge) to you (O Muhammad [pbuh] ) under the tree." [Al-Qur'an 48:18] 
When Quraish saw the firm determination of the Muslims to shed the last drop of 
blood for the defence of their Faith, they came to their senses and realized that 
Muhammad’s followers could not be cowed down by these tactics. After some further 
interchange of messages they agreed to conclude a treaty of reconciliation and peace 
with the Muslims. The clauses of the said treaty go as follows: 
1. The Muslims shall return this time and come back next year, but they shall 
not stay in Makkah for more than three days. 
2. They shall not come back armed but can bring with them swords only 
sheathed in scabbards and these shall be kept in bags. 
3. War activities shall be suspended for ten years, during which both parties will 
live in full security and neither will raise sword against the other. 
4. If anyone from Quraish goes over to Muhammad [pbuh] without his 
guardian’s permission, he should be sent back to Quraish, but should any of 
Muhammad’s followers return to Quraish, he shall not be sent back. 
5. Whosoever wishes to join Muhammad [pbuh], or enter into treaty with him, 
should ha