ophet [pbuh]. [Za'd Al-Ma'ad 1/19]  
Traditions delightfully relate how Haleemah and the whole of her household were 
favoured by successive strokes of good fortune while the baby Muhammad [pbuh] 
lived under her care. Ibn Ishaq states that Haleemah narrated that she along with 
her husband and a suckling babe, set out from her village in the company of some 
women of her clan in quest of children to suckle. She said: 
It was a year of drought and famine and we had nothing to eat. I rode on a brown 
she-ass. We also had with us an old she-camel. By All?  we could not get even a 
drop of milk. We could not have a wink of sleep during the night for the child kept 
crying on account of hunger. There was not enough milk in my breast and even the 
she-camel had nothing to feed him. We used to constantly pray for rain and 
immediate relief. At length we reached Makkah looking for children to suckle. Not 
even a single woman amongst us accepted the Messenger of All?  [pbuh] offered to 
her. As soon as they were told that he was an orphan, they refused him. We had 
fixed our eyes on the reward that we would get from the child’s father. An orphan! 
What are his grandfather and mother likely to do? So we spurned him because of 
that. Every woman who came with me got a suckling and when we were about to 
depart, I said to my husband: "By All? , I do not like to go back along with the other 
women without any baby. I should go to that orphan and I must take him." He said, 
"There is no harm in doing so and perhaps All?  might bless us through him." So I 
went and took him because there was simply no other alternative left for me but to 
take him. When I lifted him in my arms and returned to my place I put him on my 
breast and to my great surprise, I found enough milk in it. He drank to his heart’s 
content, and so did his foster brother and then both of them went to sleep although 
my baby had not been able to sleep the previous night. My husband then went to the 
she-camel to milk it and, to his astonishment, he found plenty of milk in it. He 
milked it and we drank to our fill, and enjoyed a sound sleep during the night. The 
next morning, my husband said: "By All?  Haleemah, you must understand that you 
have been able to get a blessed child." And I replied: "By the grace of All? , I hope 
so." 
The tradition is explicit on the point that Haleemah’s return journey and her 
subsequent life, as long as the Prophet [pbuh] stayed with her, was encircled with a 
halo of good fortune. The donkey that she rode when she came to Makkah was lean 
and almost foundered; it recovered speed much to the amazement of Haleemah’s 
fellow travellers. By the time they reached the encampments in the country of the 
clan of Sa‘d, they found the scales of fortune turned in their favour. The barren land 
sprouted forth luxuriant grass and beasts came back to them satisfied and full of 
milk. Muhammad [pbuh] stayed with Haleemah for two years until he was weaned as 
Haleemah said: 
We then took him back to his mother requesting her earnestly to have him stay with 
us and benefit by the good fortune and blessings he had brought us. We persisted in 
our request which we substantiated by our anxiety over the child catching a certain 
infection peculiar to Makkah.[Ibn Hisham 1/162-164] At last, we were granted our 
wish and the Prophet [pbuh] stayed with us until he was four or five years of age. 
When, as related by Anas in Sahih Muslim, Gabriel came down and ripped his chest 
open and took out the heart. He then extracted a blood-clot out of it and said: "That 

39
was the part of Satan in thee." And then he washed it with the water of Zamzam in a 
gold basin. After that the heart was joined together and r