their 
march and came to pitch their tents at the furthest part of Al-Hudaibiyah beside a 
well of scanty water. The Muslims reported thirst to the Prophet [pbuh], who took an 
arrow out of his quiver, and placed it in the ditch. Water immediately gushed forth, 
and his followers drank to their fill. When the Prophet [pbuh] had rested, Budail bin 
Warqa’ Al-Khuza‘i with some celebrities of Khuza‘ah tribe, the Prophet’s confidants, 
came and asked him what he had come for. The Prophet [pbuh] replied that it was 
not for war that he had come forth: "I have no other design," he said, "but to 
perform ‘Umrah (the lesser pilgrimage) in the Holy Sanctuary. Should Quraish 
embrace the new religion, as some people have done, they are most welcome, but if 

214
they stand in my way or debar the Muslims from pilgrimage, I will surely fight them 
to the last man, and Allâh’s Order must be fulfilled." The envoy carried the message 
back to Quraish, who sent another one called Mikraz bin Hafs. On seeing him, the 
Prophet [pbuh] said that that was a treacherous man. He was given the same 
message to communicate to his people. He was followed by another ambassador 
known as Al-Hulais bin ‘Alqamah. He was very much impressed by the spirit of 
devotion that the Muslims had for the Sacred Ka‘bah. He went back to his men and 
warned them against debarring Muhammad [pbuh] and his Companions from doing 
honour to Allâh’s house on the peril of breaking his alliance with them. Hulais was 
succeeded by ‘Urwa bin Mas‘ud Ath-Thaqafi to negotiate with Muhammad [pbuh]. In 
the course of discussion he said to the Prophet [pbuh]: "Muhammad! Have you 
gathered around yourself mixed people and then brought them against your kith and 
kin in order to destroy them. By Allâh I think I see you deserted by these people 
tomorrow." At this point Abu Bakr stood up and expressed his resentment at this 
imputation. Al-Mugheerah bin Shu‘bah expressed the same attitude and reprovingly 
forbade him from touching the Prophet’s beard. Here, Quraish’s envoy remarked 
indignantly and alluded to the latter’s treacherous act of killing his companions and 
looting them before he embraced Islam. Meanwhile, ‘Urwah, during his stay in the 
Muslim camp, had been closely watching the unfathomable love and profound 
respect that the followers of Muhammad [pbuh] showed him. He returned and 
conveyed to Quraish his impression that those people could not forsake the Prophet 
[pbuh] under any circumstances. He expressed his feelings in the following words: "I 
have been to Chosroes, Caesar and Negus in their kingdoms, but never have I seen 
a king among a people like Muhammad [pbuh] among his Companions. If he 
performs his ablution, they would not let the water thereof fall on the ground; if he 
expectorates, they would have the mucus to rub their faces with; if he speaks, they 
would lower their voices. They will not abandon him for anything in any case. He, 
now, offers you a reasonable plan, so do what you please." 
Seeing an overwhelming tendency towards reconciliation among their chiefs, some 
reckless, fight-prone youngsters of Quraish devised a wicked plan that could hinder 
the peace treaty. They decided to infiltrate into the camp of the Muslims and produce 
intentional skirmishes that might trigger the fuse of war. Muhammad bin Maslamah, 
chief of the Muslim guards, took them captives, but in view of the far-reaching 
imminent results about to be achieved, the Prophet [pbuh] set them free. In this 
context Allâh says: 
"And He it is Who has withheld their hands from y