be Khazraj. Muhammad [pbuh] dealt with this man as being a Muslim -- 
He had faked conversion into Islam for only one month, by that time -- and so he 
granted him his request; for Islam accepts people at their face value. Banu Qainuqa‘ 
handed over all materials, wealth and war equipage to the Prophet [pbuh], who set 
aside one fifth and distributed the rest to his men. After that they were banished out 
of all Arabia to Azru‘a in Syria where they stayed for a while and soon perished 
away.  
As-Sawiq Invasion 
Two-pronged hostile activities were being independently conducted against the 
Prophet [pbuh]; plots and intrigues being hatched by Safwan bin Omaiyah, the 
hypocrites and Jews on the one hand, going on and on parallel lines with military 
hostilities being prepared by Abu Sufyan aiming at saving the face of his people and 
impressing on the other Arabs that Quraish was still a military power to be counted 
for. In the aftermath of Badr, Abu Sufyan was burning for revenge and took a 
solemn vow he would never bathe off impurity unless he had avenged himself on 
Muhammad [pbuh] and his followers. He set out at the head of 200 men towards 
Madinah but was not brave enough to attack it in broad daylight. He, instead 
resorted to acts of piracy that are performed in the dark. He infiltrated into the 
Prophet [pbuh]’s town and went to see an old ally Huyai bin Akhtab, who was too 
cowardly to let him in, so he left for Salam bin Mashkam, chief of Bani Nadeer, a 

151
tribe of Jews. The Jew entertained and gave him a full account of the situation 
therein. Late at night he despatched a group of his men to raid Al-‘Uraid, a suburb of 
Madinah. There, the men felled and burnt the palm trees, killed two Muslims and 
then took swiftly to their heels. 
On hearing the news, the Prophet [pbuh] gathered his men and set out at their 
heels, but could not catch them. The Muslims brought back the provisions (Sawiq, a 
kind of barley porridge) which the polytheists had thrown aside in order to lighten 
their loads and hasten their escape; hence this campaign was called As-Sawiq 
Invasion. It took place in Dhul-Hijjah 2 A.H., two months after the event of Badr.[Za'd 
Al-Ma'ad 2/90,91; Ibn Hisham 2/44,45] 
Dhi Amr Invasion, Muharram, 3 A.H 
The Prophet [pbuh]’s intelligence personnel reported that Banu Tha‘labah and Banu 
Muhârib were mustering troops with the aim of raiding the outskirts of Madinah. The 
Prophet [pbuh] at the head of 450 horsemen and footmen set out to handle this new 
situation. ‘Uthman bin ‘Affan was asked to dispose the affairs of the Muslims in 
Madinah. On their way, they captured a man who embraced Islam and acted as a 
guide for the army. When the enemies heard of the approach of the Muslims, they 
hurriedly dispersed in the mountains and disappeared. The Muslims encamped at a 
watering place called "Dhi Amr" for the whole of Safar 3 A.H. The Prophet [pbuh] 
aimed to impress upon the desert bedouins in the area, that the Muslims were then 
powerful enough to cast fear and awe into the hearts of their enemies.[Za'd Al-Ma'ad 2/91;