ah.[Ibn Hisham 1/107] 
2. ‘Abdul-Muttalib: We have already known that after the death of Hashim, the 
charge of pilgrims’ food and water went to his brother Al-Muttalib bin ‘Abd 
Munaf (who was honest, generous and trustworthy). When ‘Abdul-Muttalib 
reached the age of boyhood, his uncle Al-Muttalib heard of him and went to 
Madinah to fetch him. When he saw him, tears filled his eyes and rolled down 
his cheeks, he embraced him and took him on his camel. The boy, however 
abstained from going with him to Makkah until he took his mother’s consent. 
Al-Muttalib asked her to send the boy with him to Makkah, but she refused. 
He managed to convince her saying: "Your son is going to Makkah to restore 
his father’s authority, and to live in the vicinity of the Sacred House." There in 
Makkah, people wondered at seeing Abdul-Muttalib, and they considered him 
the slave of Muttalib. Al-Muttalib said: "He is my nephew, the son of my 
brother Hashim." The boy was brought up in Al-Muttalib’s house, but later on 
Al-Muttalib died in Bardman in Yemen so ‘Abdul-Muttalib took over and 
managed to maintain his people’s prestige and outdo his grandfathers in his 
honourable behaviour which gained him Makkah’s deep love and high esteem. 
[Ibn Hisham 1/137,138]  
When Al-Muttalib died, Nawfal usurped ‘Abdul-Muttalib of his charges, so the 
latter asked for help from Quraish but they abstained from extending any sort 
of support to either of them. Consequently, he wrote to his uncles of Bani An-
Najjar (his mother’s brothers) to come to his aid. His uncle, Abu Sa‘d bin ‘Adi 
(his mother’s brother) marched to Makkah at the head of eighty horsemen 
and camped in Abtah in Makkah. ‘Abdul-Muttalib received the men and invited 
them to go to his house but Abu Sa‘d said: "Not before I meet Nawfal." He 
found Nawfal sitting with some old men of Quraish in the shade of Al-Ka‘bah. 
Abu Sa‘d drew his sword and said: "I swear by All?  that if you don’t restore 
to my nephew what you have taken, I will kill you with this sword." Nawfal 
was thus forced to give up what he had usurped, and the notables of Quraish 
were made to witness to his words. Abu Sa‘d then went to ‘Abdul-Muttalib’s 
house where he stayed for three nights, made ‘Umra and left back for 
Madinah. Later on, Nawfal entered into alliance with Bani ‘Abd Shams bin ‘Abd 
Munaf against Bani Hashim. When Khuza‘a, a tribe, saw Bani An-Najjar’s 
support to ‘Abdul-Muttalib they said: "He is our son as he is yours. We have 
more reasons to support him than you." ‘Abd Munaf’s mother was one of 
them. They went into An-Nadwa House and entered into alliance with Bani 
Hashim against Bani ‘Abd Sha