i to the governor of Bahrain, 
carrying a letter inviting him to embrace Islam. In reply, Al-Mundhir bin Sawa wrote 
the following letter: 
"Allâh’s Messenger [pbuh]! I received your injunctions. Prior to this, I read your 
letter, which you wrote to the people of Bahrain extending to them an invitation to 
Islam. Islam appealed to some of them and they entered the fold of Islam, while 
others did not find it appealing. In my country, there live Magians and Jews, and 
therefore you may inform me of the treatment to be extended to them." 
The Prophet [pbuh] wrote the following letter in reply to his: 
"In the Name of Allâh, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful. 
From Muhammad, Messenger of Allâh to Mundhir bin Sawa. 
Peace be on you! I praise Allâh with no associate, and I bear witness that 
Muhammad is His slave and Messenger. 
Thereafter, I remind you of Allâh, the Mighty, the Glorious. Whoever accepts 
admonition, does it for his own good. Whoever follows my messengers and acts in 
accordance with their guidance, he, in fact, accepts my advice. 
My messengers have highly praised your behaviour. You shall continue in your 
present office. Give the new Muslims full chance to preach their religion. I accept 
your recommendation regarding the people of Bahrain, and I pardon the offences of 
the offenders; therefore, you may also forgive them. 
Of the people of Bahrain whoever wants to go on in their Jewish or Magian faith, 
should be made to pay Jizya (poll-tax)."[Za'd Al-Ma'ad 3/61,62]   

227
6. A Letter to Haudha bin ‘Ali, Governor of Yamama 
"In the Name of Allâh, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful. 
From Muhammad, Messenger of Allâh to Haudha bin ‘Ali. 
Peace be upon him who follows true guidance. Be informed that my religion shall 
prevail everywhere. You should accept Islam, and whatever under your command 
shall remain yours." 
The envoy chosen was Sulait bin ‘Amr Al-‘Amiri, who after communicating his 
message, carried back the following reply to the Prophet [pbuh]: 
"The Faith, to which you invite me, is very good. I am a famous orator and poet, the 
Arabs highly respect me and I am of account among them. If you include me in your 
government, I am prepared to follow you." 
The governor then bestowed a reward on Sulait and presented him with clothes 
made of Hajr fabric. Of course, he put all those presents in the trust of the Prophet 
[pbuh]. 
The Prophet [pbuh] did not accept Haudha’s demand. He usually turned down such 
peremptory tone, and would say that the whole matter was in the Hand of Allâh, 
Who gave His land to whoever He desired. Gabriel later came with the Revelation 
that Haudha had died. The Prophet [pbuh], in the context of his comment on this 
news, said: "Yamama is bound to give rise to a liar who will arrogate Prophethood to 
himself but he will subsequently be killed." In reply to a question relating to the 
identity of the killer, the Prophet said "It is one of you, followers of Islam."[Za'd Al-Ma'ad 
3/63] 
7. A Letter to Harith bin Abi Shamir Al-Ghassani, King of Damascus 
"In the Name of Allâh, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful. 
From Muhammad, Messenger of Allâh to Al-Harith bin Abi Shamir.  
Peace be upon him who follows true guidance, believes in it and regards it as true. I 
invite you to believe in Allâh Alone with no associate, thenceafter your kingdom will 
remain yours." 
Shuja‘ bin Wahab had the honour of taking the letter to Harith, who upon hearing 
the letter read in his audience, was madly infuriated and uttered: "Who dares to 
disposs me of my country, I’ll fight him (the Prophet)," and arrogantly rejected the 
Prophet’s invitation to the fold of Islam.[Za'd Al-Ma'ad 3/62; Muhadarat Tareekh Al-Umam Al-Islamiyah 
1/146] 
8. A Letter to the King of ‘Oman, Jaifer, and his Brother ‘Abd Al-Jalandi 
"In the Name of Allâh, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful. 
From Muhammad bin ‘Abdullah to Jaifer and ‘Abd Al-Jalandi. 

228
Peace be upon him who follows true guidance; thereafter I invite both of you to the 
Call of Islam. Embrace Islam. Allâh has sent me as a Prophet to all His creatures in 
order that I may instil fear of Allâh in the hearts of His disobedient creatures so that 
there may be left no excuse for those who deny Allâh. If you two accept Islam, you 
will remain in command of your country; but if you refuse my Call, you’ve got to 
remember that all your possessions are perishable. My horsemen will appropriate 
your land, and my Prophethood will assume preponderance over your kingship." 
‘Amr bin Al-’As, who was chosen to carry the letter, narrated the following story that 
happened before he was admitted into the audience of Jaifer. 
"When I arrived in ‘Oman I contacted ‘Abd, who was known to be more mild-
tempered than his brother: 
‘Amr: I am the messenger of Allâh’s Prophet coming to see both, you and your 
brother. 
‘Abd: You have to see my brother and read to him the letter you are carrying. He is 
my senior in both age and kingship. Incidentally, what is the purport of your 
mission? 
‘Amr: The Prophet calls upon you to believe in Allâh Alone with no associate, discard 
any other deities and testify to the slavehood and Messengership of Muhammad. 
‘Abd: O ‘Amr! You come from a noble family, but first of all, tell me what was your 
father’s attitude concerning this Faith? You know, we used to follow his steps. 
‘Amr: Death overtook him before believing in Muhammad’s mission; I wish now he 
had embraced Islam and been truthful to it before his death. I myself had adopted 
the same attitude until Allâh guided me towards Islam. 
‘Abd: When did you embrace Islam? 
‘Amr: When I was at Negus’s court. By the way, the latter did also enter into the fold 
of Islam. 
‘Abd: What was his people’s reaction? 
‘Amr: They approved of him and followed his steps. 
‘Abd: The bishops and monks? 
‘Amr: They did the same. 
‘Abd: Beware ‘Amr of lying for this soon betrays man. 
‘Amr: I never tell lies; moreover, our religion never allows it. 
‘Abd: Has Hercules been informed of the Islamization of Negus? 

229
‘Amr: Yes, of course. 
‘Abd: How did you happen to know that? 
‘Amr: Negus used to pay land tax to Hercules, but when the former embraced Islam, 
he swore he would discontinue that tax. When this news reached Hercules, his 
courtiers urged him to take action against Negus but he refused and added that he 
himself would do the same if he were not sparing of his kingship. 
‘Abd: What does your Prophet exhort you to do? 
‘Amr: He exhorts us to obey Allâh, the All-Mighty, the All-Glorious, be pious and 
maintain good ties with family kin; he forbids disobedience, aggression, adultery, 
wine, idolatry and devotion to the cross. 
‘Abd: Fair words and fair beliefs are those you are calling for. I wish my brother 
would follow me to believe in Muhammad [pbuh] and profess his religion, but my 
brother is too sparing of his kingship to become a subordinate. 
‘Amr: Should your brother surrender himself to Islam, the Prophet would give him 
authority over his people and take alms tax from the wealthy people to be given to 
the needy. 
‘Abd: That is fair behaviour. But what is this alms tax you have mentioned? 
‘Amr: It is a Divine injunction that alms tax be taken from the well-to-do people who 
have surplus wealth and be distributed to the poor. 
‘Abd: I doubt if this can work among our people. 
‘Amr stayed for some days to be admitted into Jaifer’s court until he was finally 
granted this permit. "He asked me to hand him the letter to read it. After that he 
asked me how Quraish reacted and I answered that they had followed him, some out 
of their own freewill and others overpowered by military fighting. Now, people have 
chosen Islam in preference to other creeds, and have realized through their mental 
insight that they had been straying in darkness. None, except you, is now out of the 
domain of Islam, so I advise you to embrace Islam so that you can provide security 
to yourself and your country." 
Here, he asked me to call on him the following day. The following day he showed 
some reluctance in receiving me but his brother, ‘Abd, interceded and I was given 
the chance to see him again but this time to address me in a threatening arrogant 
tone. However, after a private talk with his brother and reconsidering the whole 
situation, both brothers embraced Islam and proved to be true to Islam that had 
begun to make its way into this new area. 
The context of this story reveals that this letter was sent at a much later date than 
the others, most lik