-Mustaliq Ghazwah 
‘Abdullah bin Ubai, a terrible hypocrite was full of rancour against Islam and the 
Muslims because he believed that the Prophet [pbuh] had dispossessed him of his 
leadership over Al-Aws and Al-Khazraj, two clans already agreed on the Prophethood 
of Muhammad [pbuh] and his masterhood over them. 
‘Abdullah’s rancour had appeared before he feigned Islam. Following the battle of 
Badr, he made pretensions of being a Muslim, but deep at heart, he remained that 
terrible enemy of Allâh, His Messenger; and all the believers, in general. His sole 
target had always been to sow the seeds of dissension in the Muslim community, and 
undermine the cause of the new heavenly religion it has. His treacherous behaviour 
could be witnessed everywhere but was strikingly evident in his wicked attempts at 
creating a state of confusion and disorder amongst the Muslims at Uhud Battle. His 
hypocrisy and deceit assumed serious and ugly dimensions when he used to stand 
up among the Muslims shortly before the Prophet’s Friday speech, and mockingly say 
to them: "This is the Messenger of Allâh, who has honoured you with Allâh, so you 
have got to support, obey and listen to him," and then he would sit down. 
He did the same following Uhud Battle on Friday. He was so rude and presumptuous 
that his words smacked unmistakingly of deeply-rooted rancour, so that some of the 
Muslims took him by his cloak reproachingly and silenced him. He immediately left, 
uttering rude and mocking words. A Helper met him at the Mosque gate and ordered 
him to return and beg the Messenger for Allâh’s forgiveness, but he retorted that he 

208
had never wanted him to ask for that.[Ibn Hisham 2/105] He, moreover, conducted 
clandestine contacts with Bani Nadir, another tribe of Jews, encouraging them to 
make alliance with him and promising support for them; all of this in his ceaseless 
efforts in a long process of conspiracy and intrigue hatched against the Muslims. 
Allâh’s Words as regards his treacherous acts and awe-inspiring attempts during the 
Trench Battle came to testify quite clearly to this mode of hypocrisy: 
"And when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease (of 
doubts) said: ‘Allâh and His Messenger ([pbuh]) promised us nothing but 
delusions!" [Al-Qur'an 33:12] 
The verses go on in the same context to describe the hypocrite as a coward and a 
defeatist. He is a liar and has no regard for pledges solemnly made. He is 
treacherous, disloyal and perfidious. He is niggardly and greedy. In short, he is the 
complete antithesis of a true believer: 
"They think that Al-Ahzab (the Confederates) have not yet withdrawn, and 
if Al-Ahzab (the Confederates) should come (again), they would wish they 
were in the deserts (wandering) among the bedouins, seeking news about 
you (from a far place); and if they (happen) to be among you, they would 
not fight but little." [Al-Qur'an 33:20] 
All enemies of Islam from the Jews, hypocrites and polytheists did acknowledge that 
Islam had the upper hand not because of material superiority, multitudes of troops 
or much equipment; but it was rather due to the noble values, refined ethics and 
high attributes that imbued the Muslim community and whoever was attached to it. 
The enemies of Islam were already aware of that flood of light der