splendid results of the peace 
treaty which Allâh called "a manifest victory". How could it be otherwise when 
Quraish had recognized the legitimate Muslims’ existence on the scene of political life 
in Arabia, and began to deal with the believers on equal terms. Quraish in the light of 
the articles of the treaty, had indirectly relinquished its claim to religious leadership, 
and admitted that they were no longer interested in people other than Quraish, and 
washed their hands of any sort of intervention in the religious future of the Arabian 
Peninsula. The Muslims did not have in mind to seize people’s property or kill them 
through bloody wars, nor did they ever think of pursuing any coercive approaches in 
their endeavours to propagate Islam, on the contrary, their sole target was to 
provide an atmosphere of freedom as regards ideology or religion: 
"Then whosoever wills, let him believe, and whosoever wills, let him 
disbelieve." [Al-Qur'an 18:29] 
The Muslims, on the other hand, had the opportunity to spread Islam over areas not 
then explored. When there was armistice, war was abolished, and men met and 
consulted together, none talked about Islam intelligently without entering it; within 
the two years following the conclusion of the treaty double as many entered Islam as 
ever before. This is supported by the fact that the Prophet [pbuh] went out to Al-
Hudaibiyah with only 1,400 men, but when he set out to liberate Makkah, two years 
later, he had 10,000 men with him. 

218
The article of the treaty pertaining to cessation of hostilities for ten years points 
directly to the utter failure of political haughtiness exercised by Quraish and its allies, 
and functions as evidence of the collapse and impotence of the war instigator. 
Quraish had been obliged to lose those advantages in return for one seemingly in its 
favour but does not actually bear any harm against the Muslims, i.e., the article that 
speaks of handing over believing men who seek refuge with the Muslims without 
their guardians’ consent to Quraish. At first glance, it was a most distressing clause 
and was considered objectionable in the Muslim camp. However, in the course of 
events, it proved to be a great blessing. The Muslims sent back to Makkah were not 
likely to renounce the blessings of Islam; contrariwise, those very Muslims turned 
out to be centres of influence for Islam. It was impossible to think that they would 
become apostates or renegades. The wisdom behind this truce assumed its full 
dimensions in some subsequent events. After the Prophet [pbuh] had reached 
Madinah, Abu Baseer, who had escaped from Quraish, came to him as a Muslim; 
Quraish sent two men demanding his return, so the Prophet [pbuh] handed him over 
to them. On the way to Makkah, Abu Baseer managed to kill one of them, and the 
other one fled to Madinah with Abu Baseer in pursuit. When he reached the Prophet 
[pbuh], he said, "Your obligation is over and Allâh has freed you from it. You duly 
handed me over to the men, and Allâh has rescued me from them." The Prophet 
[pbuh] said, "Woe is his mother, he would have kindled a war if there had been 
others with him." When he heard that, he knew that he would be handed back to 
them, so he fled from Madinah and went as far as Saif Al-Bahr. The other Muslims 
who were oppressed in Makkah began to escape to Abu Baseer. He was joined by 
Abu Jandal and others until a fair-sized colony was formed and soon sought revenge 
on Quraish and started to intercept their caravans. The pagans of Makkah finding 
themselves unable to control those exiled colonists, begged the Prophet [pbuh] to do 
away with the clause which governed the extradition. They implored him by Allâh 
and by their ties of kinship to send for the group, saying that whoever joined the 
Muslims in Madinah would be safe from them. So the Prophet [pbuh] sent for the 
group and they responded, as expected, positively. 
These are the realities of the clauses of the truce treaty and as it seems they all 
function in favour of the nascent Islamic state. However, two points in the treaty 
made it distasteful to some Muslims, namely they were not given access to the Holy 
Sanctuary that year, and the seemingly humiliating attitude as regards reconciliation 
with the pagans of Quraish. ‘Umar, unable to contain himself for the distress taking 
full grasp of his heart, went to the Prophet [pbuh] and said: "Aren’t you the true 
Messenger of Allâh?" The Prophet [pbuh] replied calmly, "Why not?" ‘Umar again 
spoke and asked: "Aren’t we on the path of righteousness and our enemies in the 
wrong?" Without showing any resentment, the Prophet [pbuh] replied that it was so. 
On getting this reply he further urged: "Then we should not suffer any humiliation in 
the matter of Faith." The Prophet [pbuh] was unruffled and with perfect confidence 
said: "I am the true Messenger of Allâh, I never disobey Him, He shall help me." "Did 
you not tell us," rejoined ‘Umar, "that we shall perform pilgrimage?" "But I have 
never told you," replied the Prophet [pbuh], "that we shall do so this very year." 
‘Umar was silenced. But his mind was disturbed. He went to Abu Bakr and expressed 
his feelings before him. Abu Bakr who had never been in doubt as regards the 
Prophet’s truthfulness and veracity confirmed what the Prophet [pbuh] had told him. 
In due course the Chapter of Victory (48th) was revealed saying: 

219
"Verily, We have given you (O Muhammad [pbuh]) a manifest victory." [Al-
Qur'an 48:1] 
The Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] summoned ‘Umar and imported to him the happy 
tidings. ‘Umar was overjoyed, and greatly regretted his former attitude. He used to 
spend in charity, observe fasting and prayer and free as many slaves as possible in 
expiation for that reckless attitude he had assumed. [Fath Al-Bari 7/439-458; Sahih Al-Bukhari 1/378-
381] 
The early part of the year 7 A.H. witnessed the Islamization of three prominent men 
of Makkah, ‘Amr bin Al-‘As, Khalid bin Al-Waleed and ‘Uthman bin Talhah. On their 
arrival and entrance into the fold of Islam, the Prophet [pbuh] said, "Quraish has 
given us its own blood