bin Hisham." 
‘Umar, obviously, was the one who merited that privilege. [At-Tirmidhi 2/209] 
When we scrutinize the several versions that speak of ‘Umar’s conversion, we can 
safely conclude that various contradictory emotions used to conflict with one another 
within his soul. On the one hand, he used to highly regard the traditions of his 
people, and was habituated to the practice of indulgence in wine orgies; on the other 
hand, he greatly admired the stamina of the Muslims and their relentless dedication 
to their faith. These two extreme views created a sort of skepticism in his mind and 
made him at times tend to believe that the doctrines of Islam could bear better and 
more sacred seeds of life, that is why he would always experience fits of outrage 
directly followed by unexpected enervation.[Fiqh As-Seerah, p92,93] On the whole, 
the account of his conversion is very interesting and requires us to go into some 
details. 
One day, ‘Umar bin Al-Khattab set out from his house, and headed for the Holy 
Sanctuary where he saw the Prophet [pbuh] offering prayer and overheard him 
reciting the S? ah Al-H? qah (Chapter 69 — The Reality) of the Noble Qur’? . The 
Words of All?  appealed to him and touched the innermost cells of his heart. He felt 

70
that they derived from unusual composition, and he began to question his people’s 
allegations as regards the man-composed poetry or words of a soothsayer that they 
used to attach to the Noble Qur’? . The Prophet [pbuh] went on to recite: 
"That this is verily the word of an honoured Messenger (i.e. Gabriel or Muhammad 
[pbuh] which he has brought from All? ). It is not the word of a poet, little is that 
you believe! Nor is it the word of a soothsayer (or a foreteller), little is that you 
remember! This is the Revelation sent down from the Lord of the ‘Alamin (mankind, 
jinns and all that exists)." [Al-Qur'an 69:40-43] 
At that very moment, Islam permeated his heart.[Tareekh 'Umar bin Al-Khattab p.6] 
However, the dark layer of pre-Islamic tendencies, the deep-seated traditional 
bigotry as well as the blind pride in his forefathers overshadowed the essence of the 
great Truth that began to feel its way reluctantly into his heart. He, therefore, 
persisted in his atrocities against Islam and its adherents unmindful of the pure and 
true-to-man’s nature feeling that lay behind that fragile cover of pre-Islamic 
ignorance and mentality. His sharp temper and excessive enmity towards the 
Prophet [pbuh] led him one day to leave his house, sword in hand, with the intention 
of killing the Prophet [pbuh] . He was in a fit of anger and was fretting and fuming. 
Nu‘aim bin ‘Abdullah, a friend of ‘Umar’s, met him accidentally half way. What had 
caused so much excitement in him and on whom was the fury to burst, he inquired 
casually. ‘Umar said furiously: "To destroy the man Muhammad ([pbuh]) this 
apostate, who has shattered the unity of Quraish, picked holes in their religion, 
found folly with their wise men and blasphemed their gods." "‘Umar, I am sure, your 
soul has deceived you, do you think that Banu ‘Abd Munaf would let you walk on 
earth if you slain Muhammad [pbuh]? Why don’t you take care of your own family 
first and set them ri