[Al-
Qur'an 6:121] 
4. Consecration of certain portions of food, drink, cattle, and crops to idols. 
Surprisingly enough, portions were also consecrated to All?  Himself, but 
people often found reasons to transfer parts of All? ’s portion to idols, but 
never did the opposite. To this effect, the Qur’? ic verses go: 
"And they assign to All?  a share of the tilth and cattle which He has 
created, and they say: ‘This is for All?  according to their pretending, and 
this is for our (All? ’s so-called) partners.’ But the share of their (All? ’s so-
called) ‘partners’, reaches not All? , while the share of All?  reaches their 
(All? ’s so-called) ‘partners’. Evil is the way they judge." [Al-Qur'an 6:136] 
5. Currying favours with these idols through votive offerings of crops and cattle, 
to which effect, the Qur’?  goes:  
"And according to their pretending, they say that such and such cattle and 
crops are forbidden, and none should eat of them except those whom we 
allow. And (they say) there are cattle forbidden to be used for burden or 
any other work, and cattle on which (at slaughtering) the Name of All?  is 
not pronounced; lying against Him (All? )." [Al-Qur'an 6:138] 
6. Dedication of certain animals (such as Bahira, Sa’iba, Wasila and Hami) to 
idols, which meant sparing such animals from useful work for the sake of 
these heathen gods. Bahira, as reported by the well-known historian, Ibn 
Ishaq, was daughter of Sa’iba which was a female camel that gave birth to 
ten successive female animals, but no male ones, was set free and forbidden 
to yoke, burden or being sheared off its wool, or milked (but for guests to 
drink from); and so was done to all her female offspring which were given the 
name ‘Bahira’, after having their ears slit. The Wasila was a female sheep 
which had ten successive female daughters in five pregnancies. Any new 
births from this Wasila were assigned only for male people. The Hami was a 
male camel which produced ten progressive females, and was thus similarly 
forbidden. In mention of this, the Qur’? ic verses go:  
"All?  has not instituted things like Bahira ( a she-camel whose milk was 
spared for the idols and nobody was allowed to milk it) or a Sa’iba (a she 
camel let loose for free pasture for their false gods, e.g. idols, etc., and 
nothing was allowed to be carried on it), or a Wasila (a she-camel set free 
for idols because it has given birth to a she-camel at its first delivery and 
then again gives birth to a she-camel at its second delivery) or a H?  (a 
stallion-camel freed from work for their idols, after it had finished a number 
of copulations assigned for it, all these animals were liberated in honour of 
idols as practised by pagan Arabs in the pre-Islamic period). But those who 
disbelieve, invent lies against All? , and most of them have no 
understanding." [Al-Qur'an 5:103] 
All?  also says:  

24
"And they say: What is in the bellies of such and such cattle (milk or foetus) 
is for our males alone, and forbidden to our females (girls and women), but 
if it is born dead, then all have shares there