s." 
There is however some difference as regards the issue whether the Prophet saw 
Allâh with his physical eye or not. Some interpreters say that seeing Allâh with his 
naked eyes was not confirmed. Ibn ‘Abbas, on the other hand, says that the word 
Ru’ya as used in the Noble Qur’ân signifies the observation with the help of the eye. 
In Sûrah An–Najm (Chapter —The Star) we read: 
"Then he approached and came closer." [Al-Qur'an 53:8] 
Here (he) refers to archangel Gabriel, and this context is completely different from 
that in the Prophetic tradition of Isra’ and Mi‘raj, where ‘the approach’ relates to that 
of the Lord, Glory is to Him. 
Some significant suggestive incidents featured the ‘Night Journey’ of the Prophet, of 
which we could mention: 
1. The Prophet’s breast was cleft by Gabriel, his heart extracted and washed 
with the water of Zamzam —a sacred spring in Makkah. 
2. In the same context, there were brought to him two gold vessels. There was 
milk in one, while the other was full of wine. He was asked to choose either of 
them, so he selected the vessel containing milk and drank it. He (the angel) 
said: "You have been guided on Al-Fitrah or you have attained Al-Fitrah. Had 
you selected wine, your nation would have been misled." [It is a symbolic way 
of saying that good and evil in the form of milk and wine were brought before 
the Prophet and he instinctively made a choice for the good. It is very difficult 
to render the Arabic term ‘Fitrah’ into English. It denotes the original 
constitution or disposition, with which a child comes into this world, as 
contrasted with qualities or inclinations acquired during life; besides it refers 
to the spiritual inclination inherent in man in his unspoilt state]. 
3. The Prophet [pbuh] told that he saw two manifest rivers, — the Nile and the 
Euphrates — and two hidden ones. It appears that the two manifest rivers, 
the Nile and the Euphrates, symbolically describe the area in whose fertile 
valleys, Muhammad’s Message will settle, and the people whereof will always 
remain the adherent bearers of Islam that will be passed on from generation 
to another. They can by no means suggest that they well up from the Garden. 
4. He had the opportunity to see Malik, the guardian of Hell, with a cheerless 
frowning face. Therein, he saw the Hell dwellers, of whom were those who 

91
unjustly eat up the property of the orphans. They have flews similar to those 
of camels, swallowing red-hot stones and then issuing out of their backs. 
There were also the people who take usury with bellies too big to be able to 
move around; they are trodden by the people of Pharaoh when these are 
admitted into Hell. In the same abode, he saw the adulterers offered tasty 
fatty meat and rotten smelly one but they make option for the latter. The 
licentious women were also there hanging from their breasts. 
5. The ‘Night Journey’ raised a good deal of stir among the people and the 
sceptical audience plied Muhammad with all sorts of questions. He told them 
that he saw the camels of Makkan merchants to and fro. He also guided them 
to some of their animals that went astray. He informed them that he had 
drunk some of their water while they were fast asleep and left the container 
covered.  
The disbelievers, however, found it a suitable opportunity to jeer at the Muslims and 
their creed. They pestered the Prophet [pbuh] with questions as to the description of 
the Mosque at Jerusalem, where he had never gone before and, to the astonishment 
of many, the Prophet’s replies furnished the most accurate information about that 
city. He supplied them with all the news about their caravans and the routes of their 
camels. However, all this increased in them nothing but flight from the Truth, and 
they accepted nothing but disbelief. 
For the true Muslims, however there was nothing unusual about the Night Journey. 
The All-Mighty Allâh, Who is Powerful enough to have created the heavens and the 
earth by an act of His Will, is surely Powerful enough to take His Messenger beyond 
the heavens and show him those signs of His at firsthand which are inaccessible to 
man otherwise. The disbelievers on their part went to see Abu Bakr on account of 
this event, and he readily said: "Yes, I do verify it." It was on this occasion that he 
e