âh says: 
"And you (i.e. Muhammad [pbuh]) threw not when you did throw but Allâh 
threw." [Al-Qur'an 8:17] 
Only then did he give clear orders to launch a counter-attack. He was commanding 
the army, inspiring confidence among his men and exhorting them to fight manfully 
for the sake of their Lord, reciting the Words of Allâh: 
"And be quick for forgiveness from your Lord, and for Paradise as wide as 
are the heavens and the earth." [Al-Qur'an 3:133] 

139
The spirit he infused into his men was clearly witnessed by the valour of ‘Umair, a 
lad of sixteen, who flung away some dates he was eating crying out: "These (the 
dates) are holding me back from Paradise." So saying he plunged into the thick of 
the battle and died fighting bravely. Unique deeds of valour, deep devotion and full 
obedience to the Prophet [pbuh] were exhibited in the process of the battle. The 
army of the faithfuls was borne forward by the power of enthusiasm which the half-
hearted warriors of Makkah miserably lacked. A large number of the polytheists were 
killed and the others began to waver. No wonder! The standard-bearers of Truth 
were given immediate help, and supernatural agencies (the angels), were sent to 
their assistance by their Lord to help them defeat the forces of evil. 
The records of Hadith speak eloquently of the fact that the angels did appear on that 
day and fought on the side of the Muslims. Ibn ‘Abbas said: "While on that day a 
Muslim was chasing a disbeliever and he heard over him the swashing of a whip and 
the voice of the rider saying: ‘Go ahead Haizum’. He glanced at the polytheist who 
had (now) fallen down on his back. The Helper came to the Messenger of Allâh 
[pbuh] and related that event to him. The Prophet [pbuh] replied: ‘You have told the 
truth. This was the help from the third heaven."[Sahih Muslim 2/93] 
One of the Helpers captured ‘Abbas bin ‘Abdul Muttalib, who said: "O Messenger of 
Allâh, by Allâh this man did not capture me. I was captured by a man who was bald 
and had the most handsome face, and who was riding a piebald horse, I cannot see 
him here among the people." The Helper interrupted: "I captured him, O Messenger 
of Allâh." The Prophet [pbuh] replied: 
"Be quiet, Allâh the All-Mighty strengthened you with the help of a noble 
angel." 
Iblîs, the archsatan, in the guise of Suraqah bin Malik bin Ju‘sham Al-Mudlaji, on 
seeing angels working in favour of the Muslims, and Quraish rapidly losing ground on 
the battlefield, made a quick retreat despite the polytheists’ pleas to stay on. He ran 
off and plunged into the sea. 
The ranks of Quraish began to give way and their numbers added nothing but 
confusion. The Muslims followed eagerly their retreating steps, slaying or taking 
captive all that fell within their reach. Retreat soon turned into ignominious rout; and 
they flied in haste, casting away their armour, abandoned beasts of burden, camp 
and equipage. 
The great tyrant Abu Jahl, however, on seeing the adverse course of the battle, tried 
to stop the tidal wave of the Islamic victory by nerving the polytheists and 
encouraging them by all means available and adjuring them by Al-Lat and ‘Uzza and 
all symbols of paganism to stand firm in place and retaliate against the Muslims, but 
to no avail. Their morale had already been drastically reduced to zero, and their lines 
broken down. He then began to realize the reality of his arrogance and haughtiness. 
None remained around him except a gang of doomed polytheists whose resistance 
was also quelled by an Islamic irresistible storm of true devotion-based valour and 
Islam-orientated pursuit of martyrdom. Abu Jahl was deserted and left by himself on 
his horse waiting for death at the hand of two courageous lads of the Helpers. 
‘Abdur-Rahman bin ‘Awf related the following interesting story in this regard: I was 
in the thick of the battle when two youths, still seemingly inexperienced in the art of 

140
fighting, one on the right and the second on the left. One of them spoke in a secret 
voice asking me to show him Abu Jahl. I asked about his intention, to which he 
replied, that he had a strong desire to engage with him in a combat until either of 
them was killed. It was something incredible to me. I turned left and the other said 
something to the same effect and showed a similar desire. I acceded to their earnest 
pleas and pointed directly at their target. They both rushed swiftly towards the spot, 
and without a moment’s hesitation struck him simultaneously with their swords and 
finished him off. They went back to the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh], each claiming 
that he had killed Abu Jahl to the exclusion of the other. The Prophet [pbuh] asked if 
they had wiped the blood off their swords and they answered that they had not. He 
then examined both swords and assured them that they both had killed him. When 
the battle concluded, Abu Jahl’s spoils were given to Mu‘adh bin ‘Amr bin Al-Jumuh, 
because the other Mu‘awwadh bin Al-‘Afrâ’[Sahih Al-Bukhari 1/444,2/568; Mishkat 2/352] was 
later killed in the course of the same battle. At the termination of the battle, the 
Prophet [pbuh] wanted to look for this archenemy of Islam, Abu Jahl. ‘Abdullah bin 
Mas‘ud found him on the verge of death breathing his last. He stepped on his neck 
addressing him: "Have you seen how Allâh has disgraced you?" The enemy of Islam 
still defiantly answered: "I am not disgraced. I am no more than a man killed by his 
own people on the battlefield." And then inquired "Who has won the battle?" Ibn 
Mas‘ud replied "Allâh and His Messenger." Abu Jahl then said with a heart full of 
grudge "You have followed difficult ways, you shepherd!" Ibn Mas‘ud used to be a 
shepherd working for the Makkan aristocrats. 
Ibn Mas‘ud then cut off his head and took it to the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] who, 
on seeing it, began to entertain Allâh’s praise: 
"Allâh is Great, praise is to Allâh, Who has fulfilled His Promise, assisted His 
servant and defeated the confederates alone." 
He then se