res of Heavens) 
The last days of the Makkan phase of the Prophet’s life are noted for alternate 
fortunes ranging between two extremes: gradual success and continual persecution. 
However, glimpses of propitious lights were looming on the distant horizon, to 
ultimately materialize in the event of the Prophet’s Night Journey to Jerusalem and 
then Ascension through the spheres of the heavens. 
As for its exact date, it is still controversial and no common consent has been 
reached. However, the majority of jurists is in favour of a date between 16-12 
months prior to migration to Madinah. The following is a epitome of the details of 
that miraculous event narrated on the authority of Ibn Al-Qayyim.[Za'd Al-Ma'ad 
2/49; Tareekh-e-Islam 1/124; Rahmat-al-lil'alameen 1/76] 
The Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] was carried in body from the Sacred Mosque in 
Makkah to the Distant Mosque in Jerusalem on a horse called Al-Buraq in the 
company of Gabriel, the archangel. There he alighted, tethered the horse to a ring in 
the gate of the Mosque and led the Prophets in prayer. After that Gabriel took him to 
the heavens on the same horse. When they reached the first heaven Gabriel asked 
the guardian angel to open the door of heaven. It was opened and he saw Adam, the 
progenitor of mankind. The Prophet [pbuh] saluted him and the other welcomed him 
and expressed his faith in Muhammad’s Prophethood. He saw the souls of martyrs on 
his right and those of the wretched on his left. 
Gabriel then ascended with the Prophet to the second heaven, asked for opening the 
gate and there he saw and saluted John, son of Zachariya (Yahya bin Zakariya) and 
Jesus, son of Mary. They returned the salutation, welcomed him and expressed their 
faith in his Prophethood. Then they reached the third heaven where they saw Joseph 
(Yusuf) and saluted him. The latter welcomed the Prophet and expressed faith in his 
Prophethood. The Prophet, in the company of Gabriel, then reached the fourth 
heaven where he met the Prophet Enoch (Idris) and saluted him. Prophet Enoch 
returned the salutation and expressed faith in his Prophethood. Then he was carried 
to the fifth heaven where he met the Prophet Aaron (Harun) and saluted him. The 
latter returned the salutation and expressed faith in his Prophethood. In the sixth 
heaven he met Moses (Musa) and saluted him. The latter returned the salutation and 
expressed faith in his Prophethood. Muhammad [pbuh] on leaving, saw that Moses 
began to weep. He asked about the reason. Moses answered that he was weeping 
because he witnessed a man sent after him as a Messenger (Muhammad) who was 
able to lead more of his people to the Paradise than he himself did. Then Prophet 
Muhammad [pbuh] reached the seventh heaven and met Abraham (Ibrahim)[AWS] 
and saluted him. The latter returned the salutation and expressed faith in his 
Prophethood. Then he was carried to Sidrat-al-Muntaha (the remotest lote tree) and 
was shown Al-Bait-al-Ma‘mûr [(the much frequented house) which is like the Ka‘bah 
(Sacred House) encompassed daily by seventy thousand angels, so that the angels 
who once encompassed it would not have their turn again till the Resurrection]. He 
was then presented to the Divine Presence and experienced the thrill of witnessing 
the Divine Glory and Manifestation at the closest possible propinquity. There the Lord 
revealed unto His servant that which He revealed, and ordained fifty daily prayers for 
him. On his return, he spoke to Moses that his followers had been enjoined to pray 

90
fifty times a day. Moses addressing the Prophet [pbuh] said: "Your followers cannot 
perform so many prayers. Go back to your Lord and ask for a remission in number." 
The Prophet [pbuh] turned to Gabriel as if holding counsel with him. Gabriel nodded, 
"Yes, if you desire," and ascended with him to the Presence of Allâh. The All-Mighty 
Allâh, Glory is to Him, made a reduction of ten prayers. He then descended and 
reported that to Moses, who again urged him to request for a further reduction. 
Muhammad [pbuh] once more begged his Lord to reduce the number still further. He 
went again and again in the Presence of Allâh at the suggestion of Moses for 
reduction in the number of prayers till these were reduced to five only. Moses again 
asked him to implore for more reduction, but he said: "I feel ashamed now of 
repeatedly asking my Lord for reduction. I accept and resign to His Will." When 
Muhammad [pbuh] went farther, a Caller was heard sayi