he did with regard to Bilal and ‘Amir bin Fuheirah.  
The House of Al-Arqam 
In the light of these inhuman persecutions, the Prophet [pbuh] deemed it wise to 
advise his followers to conceal their conversion, in both word and deed. He took the 
decision to meet them secretly lest Quraish should get to know of his designs, and so 
take measures that might foil his goals. He also had in mind to avoid any sort of 
open confrontation with the polytheists because such a thing at this early stage 
would not be in the interest of the newly-born Call, still vulnerable and not fully 
fledged. Once, in the fourth year of Prophethood, the Muslims were on their way to 
the hillocks of Makkah to hold a clandestine meeting with the Prophet [pbuh], when 
a group of polytheists did observe their suspicious movement and began to abuse 
and fight them. Sa‘d bin Abi Waqqas beat a polytheist and shed his blood and thus 
recorded the first instance of bloodshed in the history of Islam. [Ibn Hisham 1/263] 

63
The Prophet [pbuh], on the other hand, used to proclaim the Islamic Faith and 
preach it openly with deep devotion and studious pursuit, but for the general welfare 
of the new converts and in consideration of the strategic interest of Islam, he took 
Dar Al-Arqam, in As-Safa mountain, in the fifth year of his mission, as a temporary 
centre to meet his followers secretly and instruct them in the Qur’?  and in the 
Islamic wisdom.  
The First Migration to Abyssinia (Ethiopia) 
The series of persecutions started late in the fourth year of Prophethood, slowly at 
first, but steadily accelerated and worsened day by day and month by month until 
the situation got so extremely grave and no longer tolerable in the middle of the fifth 
year, that the Muslims began to seriously think of feasible ways liable to avert the 
painful tortures meted out to them. It was at that gloomy and desperate time that 
S? ah Al-Kahf (Chapter 18 — The Cave) was revealed comprising definite answers to 
the questions with which the polytheists of Makkah constantly pestered the Prophet 
[pbuh] . It comprises three stories that include highly suggestive parables for the 
true believers to assimilate. The story of the Companions of the Cave implies implicit 
guidance for the believers to evacuate the hot spots of disbelief and aggression 
pregnant with the peril of enticement away from the true religion: 
"(The young men said to one another): "And when you withdraw from them, and 
that which they worship, except All? , then seek refuge in the Cave, your Lord will 
open a way for you from His Mercy and will make easy for you your affair (i.e. will 
give you what you will need of provision, dwelling, etc.)" [Al-Qur'an 18:16]. 
Next, there is the story of Al-Khidr (The Teacher of Arabia) and Moses [AWS] in a 
clear and delicate reference to the vicissitudes of life. Future circumstances of life are 
not necessarily the products of the prevalent conditions, they might be categorically 
the opposite. In other words, the war waged against the Muslims would in the future 
assume a different turn, and the tyrannous oppressors would one day come to suffer 
and be subjected to the same tortures to which the Muslims were then put. 
Furthermore, there is the story of Dhul-Qarnain (The Two Horned One), the powerful 
ruler of west and east. This story says explicitly that All?  takes His righteous 
servants to inherit the earth and whatever in it. It also speaks that All?  raises a 
righteous man every now and then to protect the weak against the strong. 
S? ah Az-Zumar (Chapter 39 — The Crowds) was then revealed pointing directly to 
migration and stating that the earth is spacious enough and the believers must not 
consider themselves constrained by the forces of tyranny and evil: 
"Good is (the reward) for those who do good in this world, and All? ’s earth is 
spacious (so if you cannot worship All?  at a place, then go to another)! Only those 
who are patient shall receive their rewards in full without reckoning." [Al-Qur'an 
39:10]. 
The Prophet [pbuh] had already known that Ashamah Negus, king of Abyssinia 
(Ethiopia), was a fair ruler who would not wrong any of his subordinates, so he 
permitted some of his followers to seek asylum there in Abyssinia (Ethiopia). 

64
In Rajab of the fifth year of Prophethood, a group of twelve men and four women left 
for Abyssinia (Ethiopia). Among the emigrants were ‘Uthman bin ‘Affan and his wife 
Ruqaiyah (the daughter of the Prophet [pbuh]). With respect to