week of his 
life. 
During that period, ‘Aishah used to recite Al-Mu‘awwidhat (Chapters 113 and 114 of 
the Qur’ân) and other supplications which he had already taught her.  
Five days before death 
On Wednesday, five days before he died the Prophet’s temperature rose so high 
signalling the severeness of his disease. He fainted and suffered from pain. "Pour out 
on me seven Qirab (water skin pots) of various water wells so that I may go out to 
meet people and talk to them." So they seated him in a container (usually used for 
washing) and poured out water on him till he said: "That is enough. That is enough." 
Then he felt well enough to enter the Mosque. He entered it band-headed, sat on the 
pulpit and made a speech to the people who were gathering together around him. He 
said: 
"The curse of Allâh falls upon the Jews and Christians for they have made 
their Prophets’ tombs places of worship." [Sahih Al-Bukhari 1/62; Mustta' Imam 
Malik p.360] 
Then he said: 
"Do not make my tomb a worshipped idol." [Muatta' Imam Malik p.65] 
Then he offered himself and invited the people to repay any injuries he might have 
inflicted on them, saying: 
"He whom I have ever lashed his back, I offer him my back so that he may 
avenge himself on me. He whom I have ever blasphemed his honour, here I 
am offering my honour so that he may avenge himself." 
Then he descended, and performed the noon prayer. Again he returned to the pulpit 
and sat on it. He resumed his first speech about enmity and some other things. 
A man then said: "You owe me three Dirhams." The Prophet [pbuh] said: "Fadl, pay 
him the money." He went on saying: 
"I admonish you to be good to Al-Ansar (the Helpers). They are my family 
and with them I found shelter. They have acquitted themselves credibly of 
the responsibility that fell upon them and now there remains what you have 
to do. You should fully acknowledge and appreciate the favour that they 
have shown, and should overlook their faults." 
In another version: 

306
"The number of believers would increase, but the number of Helpers would 
decrease to the extent that they would be among men as salt in the food. So 
he who from among you occupies a position of responsibility and is powerful 
enough to do harm or good to the people, he should fully acknowledge and 
appreciate the favour that these benefactors have shown and