It was during the pilgrimage season, in the eleventh year of Prophethood, that the 
Islamic Call found the righteous seeds through which it would grow up to constitute 
tall trees whose leaves would foster the new faith and shelter the new vulnerable 
converts from the blows of injustices and high-handness of Quraish. It was the 
Prophet’s wise practice to meet the delegates of the Arabian tribes by night so that 
the hostile Makkans would not debar him from achieving his objectives.[Tareekh-e-
Islam p.129] In the company of his two truthful Companions ‘Ali and Abu Bakr, he 
had an interesting talk regarding Islamization with Bani Dhuhal, but the latter 
suspended their conversion.[Mukhtasar Seerat Ar-Rasool p.150] In pursuit of the 
same objective, the Prophet and his Companions passed by ‘Aqabat Mina where they 
heard people talking. They went at their heels until they encountered six men from 
Yathrib, all of whom from Khazraj tribe: As‘ad bin Zurarah, ‘Awf bin Harith, Rafi‘ bin 
Malik, Qutbah bin ‘Amir, ‘Uqbah bin ‘Amir and Jabir bin ‘Abdullah. The last two being 
from Aws and the former four from Khazraj. 
The Madinese always heard the Jews say that a Prophet was about to rise, for the 
time for a new dispensation had arrived. Him they would follow and then smite their 
enemies as the children of ‘Ad and Iram had been smitten. [Rahmat-al-lil'alameen 
1/84; Ibn Hisham 1/429; Za'd Al-Ma'ad 2/50] 

88
"Of what tribe are you?" asked the Prophet. "Of the tribe of Khazraj," they replied. 
"Are you the allies of the Jews?" The Prophet enquired. They said: "Yes." "Then why 
not sit down for a little and I will speak to you." The offer was readily accepted for 
the fame of Muhammad [pbuh] had spread to Madinah and the strangers were 
curious to see more of the man who had created a stir in the whole area. The 
Prophet [pbuh] presented to them an expose of Islam, explained its implications, and 
the responsibilities that fell upon the men who accepted it. When the Prophet [pbuh] 
concluded his talk, they exchanged among themselves ideas to the following effect: 
"Know surely, this is the Prophet with whom the Jews are ever threatening us; 
wherefore let us make haste and be the first to join him." 
They, therefore, embraced Islam, and said to the Prophet, "We have left our 
community for no tribe is so divided by hatred and rancour as they are. Allâh may 
cement our ties through you. So let us go and invite them to this religion of yours; 
and if Allâh unites them in it, no man will be dearer than you." 
The handful of Madinese converts remained steady to the cause and they preached 
the Islam with full zeal and devotion with the result that they succeeded in winning 
adherents for Islam from amongst their fellow citizens and hardly