Muslims then marched on in a state of fasting until they reached a place called 
Al-Qadeed where water was available. There they broke fast [Sahih Al-Bukhari 
2/613] and resumed their movement towards Mar Az-Zahran. The Quraishites were 
quite unaware of the development of affairs, but the Prophet [pbuh] did not like to 
take them by surprise. He, therefore, ordered his men to kindle fire on all sides for 
cooking purposes. The idea behind this was that Quraish should be afforded full 
opportunity to assess the situation in which they were pitchforked correctly, and 
should not endanger their lives by leaping blindly in the battlefield. ‘Umar bin Al-
Khattab was entrusted with the guard duty. In the meanwhile, Abu Sufyan along 
with Hakim bin Hizam and Budail bin Warqua’, two terrible polytheists, went out to 
reconnoiter. Before they got near the camp, they met ‘Abbas, the Prophet’s uncle. 
He apprised Abu Sufyan of the situation and advised him to accept Islam and 
persuade his people to surrender before Muhammad [pbuh]; otherwise, his head 
would be struck off. 
Under the prevailing compelling circumstances, Abu Sufyan went in the company of 
‘Abbas seeking the Prophet’s [pbuh] audience. The Muslims were furious to see Abu 
Sufyan and wanted to kill him on the spot. But the two men managed, not without 
difficulties, to see the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] who advised that they see him the 
following day. The Prophet [pbuh] addressed Abu Sufyan saying: "Woe to you! Isn’t 
it time for you to bear witness to the Oneness of Allâh and Prophethood of 
Muhammad?" Here, the archenemy of Islam began to beseech the Prophet [pbuh] in 
the most earnest words that testify to the Prophet’s generosity and mild temper 
begging for pardon and forgiveness, and professing wholeheartedly the new faith. 
On request by ‘Abbas, the Prophet [pbuh], in the context of the general amnesty he 
proclaimed, gave Abu Sufyan, who had a liking for bragging, a special privilege, 
saying: "He who takes refuge in Abu Sufyan’s house is safe; whosoever confines 
himself to his house, the inmates thereof shall be in safety, and he who enters the 
Sacred Mosque is safe." 

252
On the morning of Tuesday, 17th. Ramadan, 8 A.H., the Prophet [pbuh] left Mar Az-
Zahran. He ordered Al-‘Abbas to detain Abu Sufyan at a commanding gorge that 
could afford a full view of the Muslim army parading on its way towards Makkah, and 
hence give him the chance to see the great and powerful soldiers of Allâh. The 
different tribes successively passed with their banners flown up, until at last the 
battalion of the Emigrants and Helpers with the Prophet [pbuh] at their head heavily 
armed marched by. Abu Sufyan began to wonder who those people were, to which 
Al-‘Abbas told him that they were Muhammad [pbuh] and his Companions. Abu 
Sufyan said that no army however powerful could resist those people and addressing 
Al-‘Abbas, he said: "I swear by Allâh that the sovereignty of your brother’s son has 
become too powerful to withstand." Al-‘Abbas answered, "It is rather the power of 
Prophethood," to which the former agreed. 
Sa‘d bin ‘Ubadah carried the flag of the Helpers. When he passed by Abu Sufyan, he 
said "Today will witness the great fight, you cannot seek sanctuary at Al-Ka‘bah. 
Today will witness the humiliation of Quraish." Abu Sufyan complained about this to 
the Prophet [pbuh] who got angry and said "Nay, today Al-Ka‘bah will be sanctified, 
and Quraish honoured," and quickly ordered that Sa‘d should be stripped off the flag, 
and that it should be entrusted to his son Qais, in another version, to Az-Zubair. 
Al-‘Abbas urged Abu Sufyan to hasten into Makkah and warn the Quraishites against 
any aggressive behaviour towards the Muslims. There in Makkah, he shouted at the 
top of his voice and warned against any hostilities advising them to seek safety in his 
house. His wife got indignant and tugged at his moustache cursing him and abusing 
his cowardly stance. The people within Makkah mocked Abu Sufyan and dispersed in 
different directions, some into their houses, others into the Holy Sanctuary while 
some undisciplined reckless ruffians led by ‘Ikrimah bin Abi Jahl, Safwan bin 
Omaiyah and Suhail bin ‘Amr encamped themselves in a place called Khandamah, 
with a murderous intent in their minds. 
The Prophet [pbuh], on his part, was quite modestly and calmly drawing the final 
touches for the military breakthrough awaiting the Muslims, by Allâh’s Will. He 
appointed Khalid bin Al-Waleed as a leader of the right flank of the army with Aslam, 
Sulaim, Ghifar, Muzainah and Juhainah tribes under his command to enter Makkah 
through its lower avenues. Az-Zubair bin ‘Awwam was to lead the left flank and 
would storm Makkah from the upper side holding up the Messenger’s banner. Abu 
‘Ubaidah took command of the infantry and was to penetrate into the city via a side 
valley. They were given full and decisive orders not to kill unless in self defence and 
in that case they would exterminate any aggressive elements and quell any 
opposition. 
The Muslim battalions marched out each in its already drawn route to fulfill the 
missions they were supposed to carry out. Khalid bin Al-Waleed worked his way into 
the heart of the town quite successively killing twelve of the ruffians and sustaining 
two martyrs. Az-Zubair set out and reached the fixed destination where he planted 
the banner at Al-Fath (conquest) Mosque and waited there for the arrival of the 
Prophet [pbuh]. A tent was pitched for him where he offered prayers of thanks to the 
All-Mighty Allâh, Who, out of His immense grace, had granted him a splendid victory. 
But he did not repose long. He, in the company of the Helpers and Emigrants, got up 
and proceeded towards Al-Ka‘bah, the Sacred House, which is an emblem of the 
Oneness and Supremacy of Allâh. It was unfortunately infested with idols that 

253
numbered 360. He knocked them down with his bow while reciting the verse of the 
Noble Qur’ân: 
"And Say: ‘Truth (i.e. Islamic Monotheism or this Qur’ân or Jihâd against 
polytheists) has come and Batil (falsehood, i.e. Satan or polytheism, etc.) 
has vanished. Surely! Batil is ever bound to vanish.’" [Al-Qur'an 17:81] 
And Allâh further said: 
"Say (O Muhammad [pbuh]): "The Truth (the Qur’ân and Allah’s 
Inspiration) has come, and Al-Batil (falsehood - Iblis) can neither create 
anything nor resurrect (any thing)." [Al-Qur'an 34:49] 
He then started the usual circumambulation on his ride. He was not in a state of 
Ihram (ritual consecration) then. On completion, he called for ‘Uthman bin Talhah, 
the janitor of Al-Ka‘bah, from whom he took the key. He went in and saw images of 
Prophets Ibrahim and Ishmael, [AWS], throwing divination arrows. He denounced 
these acts of Quraish and ordered that all idols be dismantled, images and effigies 
deleted. He then entered the sacred hall to face the wall opposite the door and there 
again performed devout prostrations, and went around acclaiming Allâh’s Greatness 
and Oneness. Shortly afterwards, he returned to the door-way and standing upon its 
elevated step, gazed in thankfulness on the thronging multitude below and delivered 
the following celebrated address: 
"There is no god but Allâh Alone. He has no associates. He made good His Promise 
that He held to His slave and helped him and defeated all the Confederates along. 
Bear in mind that every claim of privilege, whether that of blood, or property, is 
under my heel, except that of the custody of Al-Ka‘bah and supplying of water to the 
pilgrims. Bear in mind that for anyone who is slain, even though semi-deliberately, 
with club or whip, for him the blood-money is very severe: a hundred camels, forty 
of them to be pregnant. 
"O people of Quraish! surely Allâh has abolished from you all pride of the 
pre-Islamic era and all conceit in your ancestry, (because) all men are 
descended from Adam, and Adam was made out of clay." 
He then recited to them the verse: 
"O mankind! We have created you from a male and a female, and made you 
into nations and tribes, that you may know one another. Verily, the most 
honourable of you near Allâh is that (believer) who has At-Taqwa [i.e. one 
of the Muttaqûn: i.e. pious and righteous persons who fear Allâh much 
(abstain from all kinds of sins and evil deeds which He has forbidden), and 
love Allâh much (perform all kinds of good deeds which He has ordained)]. 
Verily, Allâh is All-Knowing, All-Aware." [Al-Qur'an 49:13] 
He further added: 
"O you people of Quraish! What do you think of the treatment that I am 
about to accord to you?" 

254
They replied: 
"O noble brother and son of noble brother! We expect nothing but goodness 
from you." 
Upon this he said: 
"I speak to you in the same words as Yusuf (the Prophet Joseph) spoke 
unto his brothers: He said: "No reproach on you this day," [Al-Qur'an 12:92] 
go your way, for you are freed ones." 
As for the door-keeping of Al-Ka‘bah and supplying of water to pilgrims, the Prophet 
[pbuh] ordered that these jobs remain in the hand of ‘Uthman bin Talhah and that 
the key will stay with him and his descendants for ever. 
When time for prayer approached, Bilal ascended Al-Ka‘bah and called for prayer. 
Abu Sufyan bin Harb, ‘Itab bin Usaid and Al-Harith bin Hisham were meanwhile 
sitting in the yard. ‘Itab bin Usaid commented on the new situation (Bilal ascending 
Al-Ka‘bah and calling for prayer) saying that Allâh honoured Usaid (his father) having 
not heard such words. The Prophet [pbuh] approached and assisted by Divine 
Revelation told them that he had learnt about what they had spoken of. Al-Harith 
and ‘Itab, taken by incredible surprise, immediately professed Islam and bore 
witness to the Messengership of Muhammad [pbuh] adding that "We swear by Allâh 
that none had been with us to inform you." 
On that very day, the Prophet [pbuh] entered ‘Umm Hani’s house where he washed 
and offered prayers of victory. ‘Umm Hani had sheltered two Makkan relatives of 
hers in her house in which act she was granted support by the Prophet [pbuh]. 
Shedding blood of nine arch-criminals was declared lawful even under the curtains of 
Al-Ka‘bah. Nevertheless, only four of them were killed while the others were 
pardoned for different reasons. As for those who were killed, mention could be made 
of ‘Abdul ‘Uzza bin Khatal who had become a Muslim and then deputed to collect 
alms-tax in the company of a Helper. They had also a slave with them. ‘Abdullah, in 
a fit of rage, killed the Helper’s slave on account of a mere trifling dispute, and 
joined the pagan Arabs as an apostate. He was never repentant at this heinous crime 
but rather employed two women singers and incited them to sing satirically about 
the Prophet [pbuh]. 
The other man who was put to death was Miqyas bin Sababa. He was a Muslim. A 
Helper accidently killed his brother Hisham. The Prophet [pbuh] had arranged the 
payment of blood money to him, which he had accepted. His revengeful nature, 
however, was never appeased, so he killed the Helper and went to Makkah as an 
apostate. 
Similarly, Huw