f his Companions who had no Hadi with them to sacrifice, were ordered to 
observe Ihram (i.e. the state of ritual consecration) into ‘Umrah (i.e. lesser 
pilgrimage), and circumambulate Al-Ka‘bah and stride ritually to and fro between As-
Safa and Al-Marwah. After that they could relieve themselves from Ihram. They, 
however, showed reluctance to do what they had been told. Thereupon, the 
Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] said: "Had I known beforehand what I knew afterward, I 
would not bring Hadi, and if I did not have Hadi, I would break Ihram. On hearing 
these words, his Companions obeyed the orders to the latter. 
On the eighth day of Dhul-Hijjah — that is the Day of Tarwiyah, he left for Mina 
where he performed the noon, the afternoon, the sunset, the evening and the dawn 
prayers. — i.e. five prayers. Then he stayed for a while till the sun rose up then he 
passed along till he reached ‘Arafah, where there was a tent built for him at 
Namirah. He sat inside till the sun went down. He ordered that Al-Qaswa’, his she-
camel, should be prepared for him. They saddled it and had it ready, so he went 
down the valley where a hundred thousand and twenty-four or forty-four thousand 
people gathered round him. There he stood up and delivered the following speech: 
" O people! Listen to what I say. I do not know whether I will ever meet you 
at this place once again after this current year. [Ibn Hisham 2/603] It is unlawful for you 
to shed the blood of one another or take (unlawfully) the fortunes of one another. They are 
as unlawful, (Haram) as shedding blood on such a day as today and in such a month as 
this Haram month and in such a sanctified city as this sacred city (i.e. Makkah and the 
surrounding areas)." 
"Behold! all practices of paganism and ignorance are now under my feet. 
The blood-revenge of the Days of Ignorance (pre-Islamic time) are 
remitted. The first claim on blood I abolish is that of Ibn Rabi‘a bin Harith 
who was nursed in the tribe of Sa‘d and whom Hudhail killed. Usury is 
forbidden, and I make a beginning by remitting the amount of interest 
which ‘Abbas bin ‘Abdul Muttalib has to receive. Verily, it is remitted 
entirely." 
"O people! Fear Allâh concerning women. Verily you have taken them on the 
security of Allâh and have made their persons lawful unto you by Words of 
Allâh! It is incumbent upon them to honour their conjugal rights and, not to 
commit acts of impropriety which, if they do, you have authority to chastise 
them, yet not severely. If your wives refrain from impropriety and are 
faithful to you, clothe and feed them suitably." 
"Verily, I have left amongst you the Book of Allâh and the Sunnah 
(Traditions) of His Messenger which if you hold fast, you shall never go 
astray." [Sahih Muslim 1/397] 
"O people, I am not succeeded by a Prophet and you are not succeeded by 
any nation. So I recommend you to worship your Lord, to pray the five 
prayers, to fast Ramadan and to offer the Zakat (poor-due) of your 
provision willingly. I recommend you to do the pilgrimage to the Sacred 
House of your Lord and to obey those who are in charge of you then you will 
be awarded to enter the Paradise of your Lord." [Rahmat-ul-lil'alameen 1/263] 
"And if you were asked about me, what wanted you to say?"  

300
They replied:  
"We bear witness that you have conveyed the message and discharged your 
ministry."  
He then raised his forefinger skywards and then moved it down towards people while 
saying: 
"O Allâh, Bear witness."  
He said tha