]      

77
The Final Phase of the Diplomacy of Negotiation 
The Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] left his confinement and went on preaching his Faith 
as usual. Quraish, likewise, repealed the boycott but went on in their atrocities and 
oppression on the Muslims. Abu Talib, the octogenarian notable, was still keen on 
shielding his nephew but by that time, and on account of the series of tremendous 
events and continual pains, he began to develop certain fits of weakness. No sooner 
had he emerged victorious from the inhuman boycott, than he was caught in a 
persistent illness and physical enervation. The polytheists of Makkah, seeing this 
serious situation and fearing that the stain of infamy that the other Arabs could 
attribute to them in case they took any aggressive action against the Prophet [pbuh] 
after he had lost his main support, Abu Talib, took a decision to negotiate with the 
Prophet [pbuh] once more and submit some concessions withheld previously. They 
then delegated some representatives to see Abu Talib and discuss the issue with 
him. Ibn Ishaq and others related: "When a serious illness caught Abu Talib, the 
people of Quraish began to deliberate on the situation and reviewed the main 
features that characterized that period and which included the conversion of ‘Umar 
and Hamzah to Islam, coupled with the tremendous stir that Muhammad [pbuh] had 
created amongst all the tribes of Quraish. They then deemed it imperative to see 
Abu Talib before he died to pressure his nephew to negotiate a compromise on the 
various disputed points. They were afraid that the other Arabs might attribute to 
them the charge of opportunism." 
The delegation of Quraish comprised 25 men including notables like ‘Utbah bin 
Rabi‘a, Shaibah bin Rabi‘a, Abu Jahl bin Hisham, Omaiyah bin Khalaf, Abu Sufyan bin 
Harb. They first paid tribute to him and confirmed their high esteem of his person 
and position among them. They then shifted to the new give-and-take policy that 
they claimed they wanted to follow. To substantiate their argument they alleged that 
they would refrain from intervening in his religion if he did the same. 
Abu Talib summoned his nephew and apprised him of the minutes of his meeting 
with them, and said: "Well, my nephew, here are the celebrities of your people. They 
have proposed this meeting to submit a policy of mutual concessions and peaceful 
coexistence." The Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] turned to them saying: 
"I will guide you to the means by which you will gain sovereignty over both 
the Arabs and non-Arabs." 
In another version, the Prophet [pbuh] addressed Abu Talib in the following words: 
"O uncle! Why don’t you call them unto something better?" Abu Talib asked him, 
"What is it that you invite them to?" The Prophet [pbuh] replied, "I invite them to 
hold fast to a Message that is bound to give them access to kingship over the Arabs 
and non-Arabs." According to Ibn Ishaq’s version, "It is just one word that will give 
you supremacy over the Arabs and non-Arabs." The Makkan deputies were taken by 
incredible surprise and began to wonder what sort of word was that which would 
benefit them to that extent. Abu Jahl asked, "What is that word? I swear by your 
father that we will surely grant you your wish followed by ten times as much." He 
said, "I want you to testify that there is no god worthy to be worshipped but Allâh, 
and then divest yourselves of any sort of worship you harbour for any deities other 
than Allâh." They immediately clapped their hands in ridicule, and said "How can you 
expect us to combine all the deities in one God. It is really something incredible." On 
their way out leaving, they said to one another, "By god this man (Muhammad 

78
[pbuh] ) will never relent, nor will he offer any concessions. Let us hold fast to the 
religion of our forefathers, and Allâ h will in due course adjudicate and settle the 
dispute between us and him." As regards this incident, Allâh revealed the following 
verses: 
"Sâd: [These letters (Sâd, etc.) are one of the miracles of the Qur’ân and 
none but Allâh (Alone) knows their meanings]. By the Qur’ân full of 
reminding. Nay, those who disbelieve are in false pride and Apposition. How 
many a generation We have destroyed before them, and they cried out 
when there was no longer time for escape! And they (Arab pagans) wonder 
that a warner (Prophet Muhammad [pbuh]) has come to them from among 
themselves! And the disbelievers say, ‘This (Prophet Muhammad [pbuh]) is 
a sorcerer, a liar. Has he made the gods (all) into One God (Allâh). Verily, 
this is a curious thing!’ And the leaders among them went about (saying): 
‘Go on, and remain constant to your gods! Verily, this is a thing designed 
(against you)! We have not heard (the like) of this among the people of 
these later days. This is nothing but an invention.’" [Al-Qur'an 38:1-7]