Hisham 1/364; Rahmat-ul-lil'alameen 1/61]  
Quraish’s Machination against the Emigrants 
Quraish could not tolerate the prospect of a secure haven available for the Muslims 
in Abyssinia (Ethiopia), so they despatched two staunch envoys to demand their 
extradition. They were ‘Amr bin Al-‘As and ‘Abdullah bin Abi Rabi‘a — before 
embracing Islam. They had taken with them valuable gifts to the king and his clergy, 
and had been able to win some of the courtiers over to their side. The pagan envoys 
claimed that the Muslim refugees should be expelled from Abyssinia (Ethiopia) and 
made over to them, on the ground that they had abandoned the religion of their 
forefathers, and their leader was preaching a religion different from theirs and from 
that of the king. 
The king summoned the Muslims to the court and asked them to explain the 
teachings of their religion. The Muslim emigrants had decided to tell the whole truth 
whatever the consequences were. Ja‘far bin Abi Talib stood up and addressed the 
king in the following words: "O king! we were plunged in the depth of ignorance and 
barbarism; we adored idols, we lived in unchastity, we ate the dead bodies, and we 
spoke abominations, we disregarded every feeling of humanity, and the duties of 
hospitality and neighbourhood were neglected; we knew no law but that of the 
strong, when All?  raised among us a man, of whose birth, truthfulness, honesty, 
and purity we were aware; and he called to the Oneness of All? , and taught us not 
to associate anything with Him. He forbade us the worship of idols; and he enjoined 
us to speak the truth, to be faithful to our trusts, to be merciful and to regard the 
rights of the neighbours and kith and kin; he forbade us to speak evil of women, or 
to eat the substance of orphans; he ordered us to fly from the vices, and to abstain 
from evil; to offer prayers, to render alms, and to observe fast. We have believed in 
him, we have accepted his teachings and his injunctions to worship All? , and not to 
associate anything with Him, and we have allowed what He has allowed, and 
prohibited what He has prohibited. For this reason, our people have risen against us, 
have persecuted us in order to make us forsake the worship of All?  and return to 
the worship of idols and other abominations. They have tortured and injured us, until 
finding no safety among them, we have come to your country, and hope you will 
protect us from oppression." 

66
The king was very much impressed by these words and asked the Muslims to recite 
some of All? ’s Revelation. Ja‘far recited the opening verses of S? ah Maryam 
(Chapter 19 — Mary) wherein is told the story of the birth of both John and Jesus 
Christ, down to the account of Mary having been fed with the food miraculously. 
Thereupon the king, along with the bishops of his realm, was moved to tears that 
rolled down his cheeks and even wet his beard. Here, the Negus exclaimed: "It 
seems as if these words and those which were revealed to Jesus are the rays of the 
light which have radiated from the same source." Turning to the crest-fallen envoys 
of Quraish, he said, "I am afraid, I cannot give you back these refugees. They are 
free to live and worship in my realm as they please." 
On the morrow, the two envoys again went to the king and said that Muhammad 
[pbuh] and his followers blasphemed Jesus Christ. Again the Muslims were 
summoned and asked what they thought of Jesus. Ja‘far again stood up and replied: 
"We speak about Jesus as we have been taught by our Prophet [pbuh] , that is, he is 
the servant of All? , His Messenger, His spirit and His Word breathed into Virgin 
Mary." The king at once remarked, "Even so do we believe. Blessed be you, and 
blessed be your master." Then turning to the frowning envoys and to his bishops 
who got angry, he said: "You may fret and fume as you like but Jesus is nothing 
more than what Ja‘far has said about him." He then assured the Muslims of full 
protection. He returned to the envoys of Quraish, the gifts they had brought with 
them and sent them away. The Muslims lived in Aby