follows:  
A. Testimony to the Oneness of All? . 
B. Belief in the Hereafter. 
C. Sanctifying one’s soul and elevating it high above evils and abominations that 
conduce to terrible consequences, besides this, there is the dire need for 
virtues and perfect manners coupled with habituating oneself to righteous 
deeds. 
D. Committing one’s all affairs to All? , the All-High. 
E. All the foregoing should run as a natural corollary to unwavering belief in 
Muhammad’s Message, and abidance by his noble leadership and righteous 
guidance.  
The verses have been prefaced, in the voice of the Most High, by a heavenly call 
mandating the Prophet [pbuh] to undertake this daunting responsibility (calling 
people unto All? ). The verses meant to extract him forcibly out of his sleep, divest 
him of his mantle and detach him from the warmth and quiet of life, and then drive 
him down a new course attended with countless hardships, and requiring a great 
deal of strife in the way of All? :  

48
"O you (Muhammad [pbuh]) enveloped (in garments)! Arise and warn." [Al-
Qur'an 74:1-2] 
Suggesting that to live to oneself is quite easy, but it has been decided that you 
have to shoulder this heavy burden; consequently sleep, comfort, or warm bed are 
items decreed to be alien in your lexicon of life. O Muhammad, arise quickly for the 
strife and toil awaiting you; no time is there for sleep and such amenities; grave 
responsibilities have been Divinely determined to fall to your lot, and drive you into 
the turmoil of life to develop a new sort of precarious affinity with the conscience of 
people and the reality of life. 
The Prophet [pbuh] managed quite successfully to rise to his feet and measure up to 
the new task, he went ahead in a spirit of complete selflessness, relentlessly striving 
and never abating in carrying the burden of the great Trust, the burden of 
enlightening mankind, and the heavy weight of the new faith and strife for over 
twenty years, nothing distracting his attention from the awesome commission. May 
All?  reward him, for us and all humanity, the best ending. The following research at 
hand gives an account in miniature of his long strive and uninterrupted struggle he 
made after receiving the ministry of Messengership. [Fi Zilal Al-Qur'an 29/168-
171,182]                             

49
Phases and Stages of the Call 
The Muhammadan Call could be divided into two phases distinctively demarcated:  
1. The Makkan phase: nearly thirteen years.  
2. The Madinese phase: fully ten years.  
Each of the two phases included distinctive features easily discernible through 
accurate scrutiny into the circumstances that characterized each of them. 
The Makkan phase can be divided into three stages:  
1. The stage of the secret Call: three years.  
2. The stage of the proclamation of the Call in Makkah: from the beginning of 
the fourth year of Prophethood to almost the end of the tenth year.  
3. The stage of the call to Islam and propagating it beyond Makkah: it lasted 
from the end of tenth year of the Prophethood until Muhammad’s [pbuh] 
emigration to Madinah.  
The Madinese phase will be considered later in its due course.  
The First Stage : Strife in the Way of the Call 
Three Years of Secret Call 
It is well-known that Makkah was the centre for the Arabs, and housed the 
custodians of Al-Ka‘bah. Protection and guardianship of the idols and stone graven 
images that received veneration on the part of all the Arabs lay in the hands of the 
Makkans. Hence the difficulty of hitting the target of reform and rectitude in a place 
considered the den of idolatry. Working in such an atmosphere no doubt requires 
unshakable will and determination, that is why the call unto Islam assumed a 
clandestine form so that the Makkans should not be enraged by the unexpected 
surprise.  
The Early Converts 
The Prophet [pbuh] naturally initiated his sacred mission right from home and then 
moved to the people closely associated with him. He called unto Islam whomsoever 
he thought would attest the truth which had come from his Lord. In fact, a host of 
people who nursed not the least seed of doubt as regards the Prophet [pbuh], 
immediately responded and quite readily embraced the true faith. They are known in 
the Islamic literature as the early converts. 
Khadijah, the Prophet’s spouse, the mother of believers, was the first to enter the 
fold of Islam followed by his freed slave Zaid bin Harithah, his cousin, ‘Ali bin Abi 
Talib, who had been living with him since his early childhood, and next came his 
intimate friend Abu Bakr As-Siddiq (Abu Bakr the truth verifier). All of those 
professed Islam on the very first day of the call. [Rahmat-ul-lil'alameen 1/50] Abu 
Bakr, and from the first day he embraced Islam, proved to be an energetic and most 

50
zealous activist. He was wealthy, obliging, mild and upright. People used to frequent 
his house and draw nigh to him for his knowledge, amity, pleasant company and 
business. He invited whomever he had confidence in to Islam and through his 
personal efforts a good number of people converted to Islam, such as ‘Uthman bin 
‘Affan Al-Umawi, Az-Zubair bin ‘Awwam Al-Asadi, ‘Abdur Rahman bin ‘Awf, Sa‘d bin 
Abi Waqqas, Az-Zuhri and Talhah bin ‘Ubaidullah At-Tamimy. Those eight men 
constituted the forerunners and more specifically the vanguard of the new faith in 
Arabia. Among the early Muslim were Bilal bin Rabah (the Abyssinian), Abu ‘Ubaidah 
bin Al-Jarrah from Bani Harith bin Fahr (the most trustworthy of the Muslim Nation), 
Abu Salamah bin ‘Abd Al-Asad, Al-Arqam bin Abi Al-Arqam from the tribe of 
Makhzum, ‘Uthman bin Maz‘oun and his two brothers Qudama and ‘Abdullah, 
‘Ubaidah bin Al-Harith bin Al-Muttalib bin ‘Abd Munaf, Sa‘id bin Zaid Al-‘Adawi and 
his wife Fatimah - daughter of Al-Khattab (the sister of ‘Umar bin Al-Khattab), 
Khabbab bin Al-Aratt, ‘Abdull?  bin Mas‘ud Al-Hadhali and many others. These were 
the Muslim predecessors. They belonged to various septs of Quraish. Ibn Hisham, a 
biographer, counted them to be more than forty. [Ibn Hisham 1/245-262] 
Ibn Ishaq said: "Then people entered the fold of Islam in hosts, men or women and 
the new faith could no longer be kept secret." [Ibn Hisham 1/262] 
The Prophet [pbuh] used to meet and teach, the new converts, the religion in privacy 
because the call to Islam was still running on an individual and secret basis. 
Revelation accelerated and continued after the first verses of "O you wrapped in 
garments." The verses and pieces of S? ah (chapters) revealed at this time were 
short ones with wonderful strong pauses and quite fascinating rhythms in full 
harmony with that delicate whispering setting. The central topic running through 
them focused on sanctifying the soul, and deterring the Muslims from falling prey to 
the deceptive glamour of life. The early verses used as well to give a highly accurate 
account of the Hell and the Garden (Paradise), leading the believers down a new 
course diametrically opposed to the ill practices rampant amongst their compatriots.  
As-Sal?  (the Prayer) 
Muqatil bin Sulaiman said: "Sal?  (prayer) was established as an obligatory ritual at 
an early stage of the Islamic Call, a two rak‘ ah (unit of prayer) Sal?  in the morning 
and the same in the evening:  
"And glorify the praises of your Lord in the ‘Ashi (i.e. the time period after 
the mid-noon till sunset) and in the Ibkar (i.e. the time period from early 
morning or sunrise till before mid-noon)." [Al-Qur'an 40:55] 
Ibn Hijr said: "Definitely the Prophet [pbuh] used to pray before ‘The Night Journey’ 
but it still remains a matter of controversy whether or not the prayer was established 
as an obligatory ritual before imposing the rules of the usual five prayers a day. It is 
related that obligatory prayer was established twice a day, in the morning before 
sunrise and after sunset. It is reported through a chain of narrators that when the 
Prophet [pbuh] received the first Revelation, Gabriel - the angel, proceeded and 
taught him how to observe Wudu (ablution). When the Prophet [pbuh] had finished, 
he took a handful of water and sprinkled it on his loins. [Mukhtasar Seerat-ur-Rasool 
p.88] 

51
Ibn Hisham reported that when it was time for prayers, the Messenger of All?
 
[pbuh] and his Companions went into a mountain valley to pray secretly. Abu Talib 
once saw the Messenger of All?  [pbuh] and Ali praying, he asked them what they 
were up to. When he got to know that it was obligatory prayer, he told them to stay 
constant in their practice. [Ibn Hisham 1/247]  
The Quraishites learn about the Call 
This stage of the Call, even though conducted in a clandestine manner and on an 
individual basis, its news leaked out and assumed a public interest all over Makkah. 
In the beginning, the Makkan leaders did not care much about Muhammad 
[pbuh]and took no heed of his teachings. At first, they thought that Muhammad 
[pbuh] was merely a religious philosophist like Omaiyah bin Abi As-Salt, Quss bin 
Sa‘idah, ‘Amr bin Nufail and their ilk who used to philosophize on godship and 
religious obligations. But this attitude of indifference soon changed into real 
apprehension. The polytheists of Quraish began to watch Muhammad’s movements 
closely and anxiously for fear of spreading his Call and producing a change in the 
prevalent mentality. [Fiqh As-Seerah p.76] 
For three underground years of activism, a group of believers emerged stamped by a 
spirit of fraternity and cooperation with one definite objective in their mind: 
propagating and deeply establishing the call unto Islam. For full three years 
Muhammad [pbuh] had been content to t