already here defying You and belying Your Messenger. O Allâh! I am waiting for Your 
victory which You have promised me. I beseech You Allâh to defeat them (the 

137
enemies)." He also gave strict orders that his men would not start fighting until he 
gave them his final word. He recommended that they use their arrows sparingly[Sahih 
Al-Bukhari 2/568] and never resort to sword unless the enemies came too close.[Abu Da'ud 
2/13] 
Abu Jahl also prayed for victory, saying: "Our Lord, whichever of the two parties was 
less kind to his relatives, and brought us what we do not know, then destroy him 
tomorrow.". They were confident that their superior number, equipment and 
experience would be decisive. The Noble Qur’ân, with a play on the word, told them 
that the decision had come, and the victory — but not in the sense they had hoped 
for: 
"(O disbelievers) if you ask for a judgement, now has the judgement come 
unto you and if you cease (to do wrong), it will be better for you, and if you 
return (to the attack), so shall we return, and your forces will be of no avail 
to you, however numerous it be, and verily, Allâh is with the believers." [Al-
Qur'an 8:19] 
The first disbeliever to trigger the fire of the battle and be its first victim was Al-
Aswad bin ‘Abdul Asad Al-Makhzumi, a fierce bad-tempered idolater. He stepped out 
swearing he would drink from the water basin of the Muslims, otherwise, destroy it 
or die for it. He engaged with Hamzah bin ‘Abdul Muttalib, who struck his leg with his 
sword and dealt him another blow that finished him off inside the basin. 
The battle had actually started. Protected by armour and shields, ‘Utbah bin Rabi‘a 
stepped forth between his brother Shaibah and his son Al-Waleed bin ‘Utbah from 
the lines of Quraish and hurled maledictions at the Muslims. Three young men of the 
Helpers came out against them: ‘Awf and Mu‘wwadh — the sons of Harith, and 
‘Abdullah bin Rawaha. But the Makkans yelled that they had nothing to do with 
them. They wanted the heads of their cousins. Upon this the Prophet [pbuh] asked 
‘Ubaidah bin Al-Harith, Hamzah — his uncle, and his cousin ‘Ali [R] to go forward for 
the combat. The three duels were rapid. Hamzah killed Shaibah, while ‘Ali killed Al-
Waleed.[Mishkat 2/343] ‘Ubaidah was seriously wounded but, before he fell, Hamzah fell 
upon ‘Utbah and with a sweep of his sword, cut off his head. ‘Ali and Hamzah carried 
‘Ubaidah back with his leg cut off. He died four or five days later of a disease in the 
bile duct. 
‘Ali was possessed of a deep conviction that Allâh’s Words were revealed: 
"These two opponents (believers and disbelievers) dispute with each other 
about their Lord." [Al-Qur'an 22:19] 
These verses were revealed in connection with men of Faith who confess their Lord 
and seek to carry out His Will (i.e. Muhammad [pbuh]’s followers at Badr Battle), 
and men who deny their Lord and defy Him (the people of Quraish). 
The duel was followed by a few more duels but the Makkans suffered terrible defeats 
in all the combats and lost some of their most precious lives. They were too much 
exasperated and enraged and fell upon the Muslims to exterminate them once and 
for all. The Muslims, however, after supplicating their Lord, calling upon Him for 
assistance, were made to hold to their position and conduct a defensive war plan 
that was successful enough to inflict heavy losses on the attackers. The Prophet 

138
[pbuh] used to pray to his Lord ceaselessly persistently and day and night to come to 
their succour. When the fierce engagement grew too hot he again began to 
supplicate his Lord saying: 
"O Allâh! Should this group (of Muslims) be defeated today, You will no 
longer be worshipped." 
He continued to call out to his Lord, stretching forth his hands and facing Al-Qiblah, 
until his cloak fell off his shoulders. Then Abu Bakr came, picked up the cloak, and 
put it back on his shoulders and said: "O Prophet of Allâh, you have cried out enough 
to your Lord. He will surely fulfill what He has promised you." 
Immediate was the response from Allâh, Who sent down angels from the heavens for 
the help and assistance of the Prophet [pbuh] and his companions. The Noble Qur’ân 
observes: 
"Verily, I am with you, so keep firm those who have believed. I will cast 
terror into the hearts of those who have disbelieved." [Al-Qur'an 8:12] 
Allâh, the All-Mighty, also inspired another message to His Messenger, saying: 
"I will help you with a thousand of the angels each behind the other 
(following one another) in succession." [Al-Qur'an 8:9] 
The Prophet [pbuh], in his trellis, dozed off a little and then raised his head joyfully 
crying: 
"O Abu Bakr, glad tidings are there for you: Allâh’s victory has approached, 
by Allâh, I can see Gabriel on his mare in the thick of a sandstorm." 
He then jumped out crying: 
"Their multitude will be put to flight, and they will show their backs." [Al-
Qur'an 54:45] 
At the instance of Gabriel, the Prophet [pbuh] took a handful of gravel, cast it at the 
enemy and said: "Confusion seize their faces!" As