Delegation 
Hawazin’s delegation arrived a Muslims just after the distribution of spoils. They were 
fourteen men headed by Zuhair bin Sard. The Messenger’s foster uncle was one of 
them. They asked him to bestow upon them some of the wealth and spoils. They 
uttered so touching words that the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] said to them: "You 
surely see who are with me. The most desirable speech to me is the most truthful. 
Which is dearer to you, your wealth or your women and children?" They replied: 
"Nothing whatsoever compares with kinship." Then when I perform the noon prayer, 
stand up and say: "We intercede with the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] to exhort the 
believers, and we intercede with the believers to exhort the Messenger of Allâh 
[pbuh] to forego the captives of our people fallen to their lot." So when the 
Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] performed the noon prayer, they stood up and said what 
they had been told to say. The Messenger [pbuh], then, said: "As for what belongs 
to me and to the children of Abdul Muttalib, you may consider them, from now on, 
yours. And I will ask my folksmen to give back theirs." Upon hearing that the 
Emigrants and the Helpers said: "What belongs to us is, from now on, offered to the 
Messenger of Allâh [pbuh]." But Al-Aqra‘ bin Habis said, "We will grant none of what 
belongs to me and to Bani Tamim,"; so did ‘Uyaina bin Hisn, who said: "As for me 
and Bani Fazarah, I say ‘No’." Al-‘Abbas bin Mirdas also refused and said: "No" for 
Bani Saleem and him. His people, however, said otherwise: "Whatever spoils belong 
to us we offer to the Messenger of Allâh ([pbuh].)" "You have undermined my 
position." Said Al-‘Abbas bin Mirdas spontaneously. Then the Messenger of Allâh 
[pbuh] said: "These people have come to you as Muslims. For this I have already 
tarried the distribution of the booty. Besides, I have granted them a fair option but 
they refused to have anything other than their women and children. Therefore he 
who has some of theirs and will prefer willingly to give them back, let them do. But 
those who favours to keep what he owns to himself, let them grant them back too, 
and he will be given as a recompense six times as much from the first booty that 
Allâh may provide us." People then said, "We will willingly offer them all for the sake 
of the Messenger of Allâh." The Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] said: "But in this way we 
are not able to find out who is content and who is not. So go back and we will be 
waiting for your chiefs to convey to us your decisions." All of them gave back the 
women and children. The only one who refused to comply with the Messenger’s 
desire was ‘Uyaina bin Hisn. He refused to let an old woman of theirs go back at first. 
Later on he let her go back. The Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] gave every captive a 
garment as a gift.  
Lesser Pilgrimage (Al-‘Umrah) to Makkah and leaving for Madinah 
Having accomplished the distribution of the spoils at Al-Ji‘ranah he left it while 
wearing Al-‘Umrah clothes and proceeded to Makkah to perform Al-‘Umrah. The 
Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] turned back from there to Madinah after appointing ‘Itab 
bin Usaid on Makkah as governor. His arrival to Madinah was by the last six nights of 
Dhul-Qa‘dah, in the year 8 A.H. On this occasion Muhammad Al-Ghazali said: 
"What a great change it is between the victorious period of Muhammad at present 
which Allâh has towered with a manifest conquest, and that period of the past during 
which Muhammad first arrived at this town, eight years ago." 
When he first came to Madinah, he