to exhort the believers to spend in charity reminding them of 
relevant virtues for which the hearts yearn. 
He said: 
"The believers in their mutual love, are like the human body where when 
the eye is in agony, the entire body feels the pain; when the head aches, all 
the body will suffer. [Narrated by Muslim]" 
And said: 
"The bonds of brotherhood between two Muslims are like parts of a house, 
one part strengthens and holds the other.[Bukhari 2/890]" 
And said: 
"Do not have malice against a Muslim; do not be envious of other Muslims; 
do not go against a Muslim and forsake him. O the slaves of Allâh! Be like 
brothers with each other. It is not violable for a Muslim to desert his brother 
for over three days.[Bukhari 2/896]" 
The Prophet [pbuh] used as well to promote that habit of abstention from asking the 
others for help unless one is totally helpless. He used to talk to his companions a lot 
about the merits, virtues and Divine reward implied in observing the prescribed 
worships and rituals. He would always bring forth corroborated proofs in order to link 
them physically and spiritually to the Revelation sent to him, hence he would apprise 
them of their duties and responsibilities in terms of the consequences of the Call of 
Islam, and at the same time emphasize the exigencies of comprehension and 
contemplation. 
That was his practice of maximizing their morale and imbuing them with the noble 
values and ideals so that they could become models of virtue to be copied by 
subsequent generations. 
‘Abdullah bin Mas‘ud [R] once said: If you are willing to follow a good example, then 
you can have a recourse in the tradition of the deceased, because the living are likely 
to fall an easy victim to oppression (so they might waver in faith). Follow the steps 
of Muhammad’s Companions. They were the best in this nation, the most pious, the 
most learned and the least pretentious. Allâh chose them to accompany the Prophet 
[pbuh] and establish His religion. Therefore, it is imperative to get to know their 
grace, follow their righteous way and adhere as much as you can to their manners 
and assimilate their biography. They were always on the orthodox path. There is 
then the great Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] whose moral visible attributes, aspects of 
perfection, talents, virtues, noble manners and praiseworthy deeds, entitle him to 
occupy the innermost cells of our hearts, and become the dearest target that the self 

123
yearns for. Hardly did he utter a word when his Companions would race to assimilate 
it and work in its light.[Mishkat Al-Masabih 1/32] 
Those were the attributes and qualities on whose basis the Prophet [pbuh] wanted to 
build a new society, the most wonderful and the most honourable society ever known 
in history. On these grounds, he strove to resolve the longstanding problems, and 
later gave mankind the chance to breathe a sigh of relief after a long wearying 
journey in dark and gloomy avenues. Such lofty morale lay at the very basis of 
creating a new society with integrated components immune to all fluctuations of 
time, and power