but 
Yours alone." 
Seeing him in this helpless situation, Rabi‘a’s two sons, wealthy Makkans, were 
moved on grounds of kinship and compassion, and sent to him one of their Christian 
servants with a tray of grapes. The Prophet [pbuh] accepted the fruit with pious 
invocation: "In the Name of the Allâh." The Christian servant ‘Addas was greatly 

83
impressed by these words and said: "These are words which people in this land do 
not generally use." The Prophet [pbuh] inquired of him whence he came and what 
religion he professed. ‘Addas replied: "I am a Christian by faith and come from 
Nineveh." The Prophet [pbuh] then said: "You belong to the city of the righteous 
Jonah, son of Matta." ‘Addas asked him anxiously if he knew anything about Jonah. 
The Prophet [pbuh] significantly remarked: "He is my brother. He was a Prophet and 
so am I." Thereupon ‘Addas paid homage to Muhammad [pbuh] and kissed his 
hands. His masters admonished him at this act but he replied: "None on the earth is 
better than he is. He has revealed to me a truth which only a Prophet can do." They 
again reprimanded him and said: "We forewarn you against the consequences of 
abandoning the faith of your forefathers. The religion which you profess is far better 
than the one you feel inclined to." 
Heart-broken and depressed, Muhammad [pbuh] set out on the way back to Makkah. 
When he reached Qarn Al-Manazil, Allâh, the Almighty sent him Gabriel together with 
the angel of mountains. The latter asked the Prophet [pbuh] for permission to bury 
Makkah between Al–Akhshabain —Abu Qubais and Qu‘ayqa‘an mountains. Full 
narration of this event was given by ‘Aishah [R] (the Prophet’s spouse). She said: "I 
asked the Prophet [pbuh] if he had ever experienced a worse day than Uhud. He 
answered that he had suffered a lot from those people (the idolaters) but the most 
painful was on the day of ‘Aqabah. I went seeking support from Ibn ‘Abd Yalil bin 
‘Abd Kalal, but he spurned me. I set out wearied and grieved heedless of anything 
around me until I suddenly realized I was in Qarn Ath-Tha‘alib, called Qarn Al-
Manazil. There, I looked up and saw a cloud casting its shade on me, and Gabriel 
addressing me: Allâh has heard your people’s words and sent you the angel of 
mountains to your aid. The latter called and gave me his greetings and asked for my 
permission to bury Makkah between Al-Akhshabain, the two mountains flanking 
Makkah. I said in reply that I would rather have someone from their loins who will 
worship Allâh, the All–Mighty with no associate." A concise meaningful answer fully 
indicative of the Prophet’s matchless character and the fathomless magnanimous 
manners. [Bukhari 1/458; Muslim 2/109] 
The Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] then came back to wakefulness and his heart was set 
at rest in the light of that invisible Divinely pro