âh [pbuh] dispatched ‘Ali bin Abi Talib to trace them 
out. He said to him: "Pursue them and see what they are going to do, and what they 
aim at. If they dismount horses and ride on camels’ back, this means that they are 
heading for Makkah; but if they ride horses and lead camels unmounted, they are 
leaving for Madinah. By the One, in Whose Hand my soul is, if they attacked Madinah 
I would march to them there and I would fight them." ‘Ali said: "I went out and 
traced them to see what they were up to. I saw them mounting camels and leaving 
the horses unmounted. They were heading for Makkah." [Ibn Hisham 2/94] 
After the departure of the Quraishites, people went out to check the identity of the 
killed and the wounded. Zaid bin Thabit said: "The Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] sent 
me on Uhud Day to seek Sa‘d bin Ar-Rabî‘ and said: "When you see him, say: ‘peace 
be upon you from me.’ and say to him ‘the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] says: How do 
you feel?’" Zaid said: "I started wandering about checking the killed till I came across 
Sa‘d when he was dying — with about seventy strokes or stabs of a sword, a spear 
and an arrow in his body.So I said: "O Sa‘d, the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] sends 
you his greetings. and says ‘peace be upon you, tell me how do you feel?’" Sa‘d said: 

178
"And let peace be upon the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh], too. Tell him, I smell the 
scent of the Paradise. And tell the Helpers, my people, ‘you shall not be excused 
before Allâh if the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] is hurt and your eyes are blinking’ (i.e. 
you are still alive and not dead)." Then he died. [Za'd Al-Ma'ad 2/96] 
They came across Al-Usairim — ‘Amr bin Thabit, whom they had already urged to 
embrace Islam but refused. They saw him among the wounded on the verge of close 
death. "What has he come here for? We have parted with him and he was still too 
obdurate to accept Islam as his religion". They asked him: "What made you come 
here? Is it out of zeal to defend your people or is it because of an inclination to 
Islam?" He said: "It is (certainly) an inclination to Islam. I believe in Allâh and in His 
Messenger. I have fought with the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] till I have got what you 
see," and then he immediately died. They told the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] about 
him. Hearing that, he said: "He is one