37
Muhammad’s Birth and Forty Years prior to Prophethood 
His Birth 
Muhammad [pbuh], the Master of Prophets, was born in Bani Hashim lane in Makkah 
on Monday morning, the ninth of Rabi‘ Al-Awwal, the same year of the Elephant 
Event, and forty years of the reign of Kisra (Khosru Nushirwan), i.e. the twentieth or 
twenty-second of April, 571 A.D., according to the scholar Muhammad Sulaim?  Al-
Mansourpuri, and the astrologer Mahm?  Pasha. [Muhadarat Tareekh Al-Umam Al-
Islamiyah 1/62; Rahmat-ul-lil'alameen 1/38,39] 
Ibn Sa‘d reported that Muhammad’s mother said: "When he was born, there was a 
light that issued out of my pudendum and lit the palaces of Syria." Ahmad reported 
on the authority of ‘Arbadh bin Sariya something similar to this. [Mukhtasar Seerat-
ur-Rasool, p.12; Tabaqat Ibn Sa'd 1/63] 
It was but controversially reported that significant precursors accompanied his birth: 
fourteen galleries of Kisra’s palace cracked and rolled down, the Magians’ sacred fire 
died down and some churches on Lake Sawa sank down and collapsed. [Reported by 
Al-Baihaqi, but Al-Ghazali didn't approve it - see Fiqh-us-Seerah p.46] 
His mother immediately sent someone to inform his grandfather ‘Abdul-Muttalib of 
the happy event. Happily he came to her, carried him to Al-Ka‘bah, prayed to All?
 
and thanked Him. ‘Abdul-Muttalib called the baby Muhammad, a name not then 
common among the Arabs. He circumcised him on his seventh day as was the 
custom of the Arabs. [Ibn Hisham 1/159,160; Zad Al-Ma'ad 1/18; Muhadarat 
Tareekh Al-Umam Al-Islamiyah 1/62] 
The first woman who suckled him after his mother was Thuyebah, the concubine of 
Abu Lahab, with her son, Masrouh. She had suckled Hamzah bin ‘Abdul-Muttalib 
before and later Abu Salamah bin ‘Abd Al-Asad Al-Makhzumi. [Talqeeh Furoom Ahl-
al-Athar p.4; Mukhtasar Seerat-ur-Rasool p.13]  
Babyhood 
It was the general custom of the Arabs living in towns to send their children away to 
bedouin wet nurses so that they might grow up in the free and healthy surroundings 
of the desert whereby they would develop a robust frame and acquire the pure 
speech and manners of the bedouins, who were noted both for chastity of their 
language and for being free from those vices which usually develop in sedentary 
societies. 
The Prophet [pbuh] was later entrusted to Haleemah bint Abi Dhuaib from Bani Sa‘d 
bin Bakr. Her husband was Al-Harith bin ‘Abdul ‘Uzza called Abi Kabshah, from the 
same tribe. 
Muhammad [pbuh] had several foster brothers and sisters, ‘Abdullah bin Al-Harith, 
Aneesah bint Al-Harith, Hudhafah or Judhamah bint Al-Harith (known as Ash-
Shayma’), and she used to nurse the Prophet [pbuh] and Abu Sufyan bin Al-Harith 
bin ‘Abdul-Muttalib, the Prophet’s cousin. Hamzah bin ‘Abdul-Muttalib, the Prophet’s 

38
uncle, was suckled by the same two wet nurses, Thuyeba and Haleemah As-
Sa‘diya