he Farewell Pilgrimage 
After the accomplishment of the Call, the proclamation of the Message and the 
establishment of a new society on the basis of ‘There is no god but Allâh,’ and on 
Muhammad’s mission, a secret call uprose in the heart of the Messenger of Allâh 
[pbuh] telling him that his stay in the Lower World was about to terminate. That was 
clear in his talk to Mu‘adh whom he had dispatched to Yemen in the tenth year of Al-
Hijra: "O, Mu‘adh! You may not see me after this current year. You may even pass 
by this very Mosque of mine and my tomb." Upon hearing that Mu‘adh cried for fear 
that he would part with the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh]. 
Allâh’s care was so bounteous as to let the Prophet [pbuh] see the fruits of his Call 
for the sake of which he suffered various sorts of trouble for over twenty years. 
Those twenty years had elapsed actively. He used to spend his last days meeting, at 
the outskirts of Makkah, members of tribes and their representatives who used to 
consult him and learn the laws and legislation of Islam from him, and in return he 
used to exact their testimony that he had delivered trust and communicated the 
Message and counselled the people. 
The Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] announced an intention to proceed with this blessed 
pilgrimage journey himself. Enormous crowds of people came to Madinah, all of 
whom seek the guidance and Imamate of the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh]in the 
pilgrimage (Al-Hajj). [Sahih Muslim 1/394] On a Saturday of the last four days of 
Dhul-Qa‘dah, the Prophet [pbuh] started the departure preparations procedure. 
[Fath Al-Bari 8/104] He combed his hair, applied some perfume, wore his garment, 
saddled his camel and set off in the afternoon. He arrived at Dhul-Hulaifa before the 
afternoon prayer. He performed two Rak‘a and spent the night there. When it was 
morning he said to his Companions:  
"A comer, sent by my Lord, has called on me tonight and said: ‘Pray in this 
blessed valley and say: I intend ‘Umrah combined w