Luhai. [Bukhari 1/499] 
The Arabs believed that such idols, or heathen gods, would bring them nearer to 
All? , lead them to Him, and mediate with Him for their sake, to which effect, the 
Qur’?  goes:  
"We worship them only that they may bring us near to All? ." [Al-Qur'an 39:3] 
and 
"And they worship besides All?  things that hurt them not, nor profit them, 
and they say: These are our intercessors with All? ." [Al-Qur'an 10:18] 
Another divinatory tradition among the Arabs was casting of Azlam (i.e. featherless 
arrows which were of three kinds: one showing ‘yes’, another ‘no’ and a third was 
blank) which they used to do in case of serious matters like travel, marriage and the 
like. If the lot showed ‘yes’, they would do, if ‘no’, they would delay for the next 
year. Other kinds of Azlam were cast for water, blood-money or showed ‘from you’, 
‘not from you’, or ‘Mulsaq’ (consociated). In cases of doubt in filiation they would 
resort to the idol of Hubal, with a hundred-camel gift, for the arrow caster. Only the 
arrows would then decide the sort of relationship. If the arrow showed (from you), 
then it was decided that the child belonged to the tribe; if it showed (from others), 
he would then be regarded as an ally, but if (consociated) appeared, the person 
would retain his position but with no lineage or alliance contract. [Muhadrat Tareekh 
Al-Umam Al-Islamiyah 1/56; Ibn Hisham 1/152,153] 
This was very much like gambling and arrow-shafting whereby they used to divide 
the meat of the camels they slaughtered according to this tradition. 
Moreover, they used to have a deep conviction in the tidings of soothsayers, diviners 
and astrologers. A soothsayer used to traffic in the business of foretelling future 
events and claim knowledge of private secrets and having jinn subordinates who 
would communicate the news to him. Some soothsayers claimed that they could 
uncover the unknown by means of a granted power, while other diviners boasted 
they could divulge the secrets through a cause-and-effect-inductive process that 
would lead to detecting a stolen commodity, location of a theft, a stray animal, and 
the like. The astrologer belonged to a third category who used to observe the stars 
and calculate their movements and orbits whereby he would foretell the future. 
[Mirqat Al-Mafateeh 2/2,3]  Lending credence to this news constituted a clue to their 
conviction that attached special significance to the movements of particular stars 
with regard to rainfall. [Muslim with An-Nawawi 1/59] 
The belief in signs as betokening future events, was, of course common among the 
Arabians. Some days and months and particular animals were regarded as ominous. 
They also believed that the soul of a murdered person would fly in the wilderness 
and would never rest at rest until revenge was taken. Superstition