he Prophet [pbuh] 
When the iniquitous decision had been made, Gabriel was sent down to Muhammad 
[pbuh] to reveal to him Quraish’s plot and give him his Lord’s Permission to leave 
Makkah. He fixed to him the time of migration and asked him not to sleep that night 
in his usual bed. At noon, the Prophet [pbuh] went to see his Companion Abu Bakr 
and arranged with him everything for the intended migration. Abu Bakr was 
surprised to see the Prophet [pbuh] masked coming to visit him at that unusual 
time, but he soon learned that Allâh’s Command had arrived, and he proposed that 
they should migrate together, to which the Prophet [pbuh] gave his consent.[Bukhari 
1/553] 
To make the necessary preparations for the implementation of their devilish plan, the 
chiefs of Makkah had chosen eleven men: Abu Jahl, Hakam bin Abil Al-‘As, ‘Uqbah 
bin Abi Mu‘ait, An-Nadr bin Harith, Omaiyah bin Khalaf, Zama‘a bin Al-Aswad, 
Tu‘aima bin ‘Adi, Abu Lahab, Ubai bin Khalaf, Nabih bin Al-Hajjaj and his brother 
Munbih bin Al-Hajjaj. All were on the alert. As night advanced, they posted assassins 
around the Prophet’s house. Thus they kept vigil all night long, waiting to kill him the 
moment he left his house early in the morning, peeping now and then through a hole 
in the door to make sure that he was still lying in his bed. Abu Jahl, the great enemy 
of Islam, used to walk about haughtily and arrogantly jeering at Muhammad’s words, 
saying to the people around him: "Muhammad claims that if you follow him, he will 
appoint you rulers over the Arabs and non-Arabs and in the Hereafter your reward 
will be Gardens similar to those in Jordan, otherwise, he will slaughter you and after 
death you will be burnt in fire."[Ibn Hisham 1/483] He was too confident of the success of 
his devilish plan. Allâh, the All-Mighty, however, in Whose Hands lie the sovereignty 
of the heavens and earth, does what He desires; He renders succour and can never 
be overpowered. He did exactly what He later said to His Prophet: 
"And (remember) when the disbelievers plotted against you (O Muhammad 
[pbuh]) to imprison you, or to kill you, or to get you out (from your home, 
i.e. Makkah); they were plotting and Allâh too was planning, and Allâh is the 
Best of the planners." [Al-Qur'an 8:30] 
At that critical time the plans of Quraish utterly failed despite the tight siege they laid 
to the Prophet’s house, the Prophet [pbuh] and ‘Ali were inside the house. The 
Prophet [pbuh] told ‘Ali to sleep in his bed and cover himself with his green mantle 
and assured him full security under Allâh’s protection and told him that no harm 
would come to him. The Prophet [pbuh] then came out of the room and cast a 
handful of dust at the assassins and managed to work his way through them reciting 
verses of the Noble Qur’ân: 
"And We have put a barrier before them, and a barrier behind them, and We 
have covered them up, so that they cannot see." [Al-Qur'an 36:9] 
He proceeded direct to the house of Abu Bakr who, immediately accompanied him 
and both set out