against the new 
religion for five years, came to realize fully that exterminating Islam is not accessible 
in the battlefields, so they resorted to other tactics. They, being reputed gossip-
mongers, decided to launch a widespread propaganda campaign aiming at slandering 
the person of the Prophet [pbuh] in a most sensitive area of the Arabian life, namely 
ethics and traditions. Following the battle of the Confederates, the Prophet [pbuh] 
married Zainab bint Jahsh after her marriage with Zaid bin Haritha, his adopted son, 
had broken up. They seized this opportunity and began to circulate idle talk against 
the Prophet [pbuh] in Arabia depending on a tradition among the desert Arabs that 
prohibits contracting a marriage with an adopted son’s divorcee. They alleged that 
his marriage would be considered a heinous sin. They also based their malicious 
propaganda on the fact that Zainab was his fifth wife whereas the number was 
strictly limited to a maximum of four in the Noble Qur’ân, hence the validity of this 
marriage was in doubt, according to them. 
These rumours and gossips had a negative impact on the morale of some weak-
hearted Muslims until the decisive verses were revealed acquitting the Prophet 
[pbuh] and invalidating all those ill designs and obnoxious schemes: 
"O Prophet (Muhammad [pbuh])! Keep your duty to Allâh, and obey not the 
disbelievers and the hypocrites (i.e. do not follow their advices). Verily! 
Allâh is Ever All-Knower, All-Wise." [Al-Qur'an 33:1] 

209
  The wicked Role they played in the course of the Ghazwah of Bani Al-Mustaliq 
During this Ghazwah, the hypocrites almost managed to create a sort of discord 
among the Muslims themselves, coupled with a serious and ugly slander against the 
Prophet [pbuh] himself. In short, their behaviour was an authentic translation of 
Allâh’s Words: 
"Had they marched out with you, they would have added to you nothing 
except disorder, and they would have hurried about in your midst 
(spreading corruption) and sowing sedition among you …" [Al-Qur'an 9:47] 
A quarrel was about to break out between the Emigrants and the Helpers on account 
of plots and evil intentions designed by the hypocrites. The Prophet [pbuh] told them 
off describing their misbehaviour as something smacking of pre-Islamic practices. 
They, hypocrites with ‘Abdullah bin ‘Ubai at their head, were furious for the challenge 
which the Muslims showed towards the hostile plans and vicious intrigues woven 
behind closed doors, and swore "the most honourable will expel the meanest out of 
Madinah," and added: "They (the Muslims) have outnumbered and shared us our 
land. If you fatten your dog, it will eat you." When that talk was reported to the 
Prophet [pbuh], ‘Umar, a venerable Companion, asked for permission to have Ibn 
‘Ubai killed. The Prophet [pbuh] naturally turned down his proposal on the grounds 
that it did not become of a Prophet [pbuh] to be accused of killing his people. He, on 
the contrary in an unexpected move, asked ‘Umar to announce departure. He 
marched with his men for two days until the sun grew too hot. They stopped and fell 
asleep, a clever attempt at diverting his people’s attention from the previous event. 
‘Abdullah’s son heard of that vile of his father and as the party reached Madinah, he 
drew his sword and barred his father’s entry into the town until he had confessed 
and declared that he himself was the meanest of the citizens of Madinah and the 
Prophet [pbuh] the most honourable of them. Thus the boast recoiled on his head. It 
was also reported that the son was ready to kill his father if the Prophet [pbuh] had 
wanted him to.  
The Slander Affair 
This extremely painful incident took place on the Prophet’s return from the 
expedition against Bani Mustaliq. The Muslim army had to halt for a night at a place, 
a short distance from Madinah. In this expedition, the Prophet [pbuh] was 
accompanied by his noble and talented wife, ‘Aishah [R]. As it so happened, ‘Aishah 
[R] went out some distance from the camp to attend to the call of nature. When she 
returned, she discovered that she had dropped her necklace somewhere. The 
necklace itself was of no great value, but as it was a loan from a friend, ‘Aishah [R] 
went out again to search for it. On her return, to her great grief and mortification, 
the army had already marched away with the camel she was riding, her attendants 
thinking that she was in the litter as she was then thin, very young and light of 
weight. In her helplessness she sat down and cried till sleep overpowered her. 
Safwan bin Mu‘attal, an Emigrant, who was coming in the rear recognized her as he 
had seen her before the verse enjoining the veil was revealed, and brought her on 
his camel to Madinah without saying a single word to her, himself walking behind the 
animal. The hypocrites of Madinah led by ‘Abdullah bin ‘Ubai bin Salul, sought to 
make capital out of this incident and spread a malicious scandal against ‘Aishah [R] 
and unfortunately some of the Muslims also became involved in it. On arrival in 
Madinah, the Prophet [pbuh] held counsel with his Companions, who pronounced 

210
different opinions ranging from divorce to retention. The incident almost roused a 
fight between two rival factions, Al-Aws and Al-Khazraj, but the Prophet’s 
intervention silenced both parties on the sport. ‘Aishah [R], unaware of the rumours 
being circulated, fell ill and was confined to bed for a month. On recovering, she 
heard of the slander and took permission to go and see her parents seeking 
authentic news. She then burst into tears and stayed for two days and one sleepless 
night ceaselessly weeping to such an extent that she felt her liver was about to rip 
open. The Prophet [pbuh] visited her in that situation, and after testifying to the 
Oneness of Allâh he told her, "If you are innocent, Allâh will acquit you, otherwise, 
you have to beg for His forgiveness and pardon." She stopped weeping and asked 
her parents to speak for her, but they had nothing to say, so she herself took the 
initiative and said "Should I tell you I am innocent, and Allâh knows that I am surely 
innocent, you will not believe me; and if I were to admit something of which, Allâh 
knows, I am innocent, you will believe me, then I will have nothing to make recourse 
to except the words of the father of Prophet Yusuf (Joseph): 
"So (for me) patience is most fitting. And it is Allâh (Alone) Whose Help can 
be sought against that which you assert." [Al-Qur'an 12:18] 
She then turned away and lay down for some rest. At that decisive moment the 
Revelation came acquitting ‘Aishah [R] of all the slanderous talk fabricated in this 
concern. ‘Aishah [R], of course, was wholeheartedly joyful and praised Allâh 
thankfully. Allâh’s Words in this regard went as follows: 
"Verily! Those who brought forth the slander (against ‘Aishah [R] — the 
wife of the Prophet [pbuh]) are a group among you." [Al-Qur'an 24:11] 
The principal elements involved in the slander affair, Mistah bin Athatha, Hassan bin 
Thabit and Hamnah bint Jahsh, were flogged with eighty stripes. 
As for the man who took the principal part, ‘Abdullah bin Ubai, he was not flogged, 
either because the corporal punishment commutes the chastisement in store for him 
in the Hereafter, and he does not deserve this merit, or for the same public interest 
for which he was not killed previously. He, moreover, became the butt of reproach 
and humiliation amongst his people after his real intentions had been unequivocally 
exposed to all the public. [Sahih Al-Bukhari 1/364,2/696-698; Za'd Al-Ma'ad 2/113-115; Ibn Hisham 2/297-307] 
Almost a month later, the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] and ‘Umar bin Al-Khattab were 
engaged in the following talk: "Don’t you see ‘Umar if I had had him (Abdullah bin 
Ubai) killed, a large number of dignitaries would have furiously hastened to fight for 
him. Now, on the contrary, if I ask them to kill him, they will do so out of their own 
free will." ‘Umar replied "I swear by Allâh that the Prophet’s judgement is much more 
sound than