Kinana.  
Khuza‘a’s reign in Makkah lasted for three hundred years, during which, the 
‘Adnanides spread all over Najd and the sides of Bahrain and Iraq, while small septs 
of Quraish remained on the sides of Makkah; they were Haloul, Harum and some 
families of Kinana. They enjoyed no privileges in Makkah or in the Sacred House until 
the appearance of Qusai bin Kilab, whose father is said to have died when he was 
still a baby, and whose mother was subsequently married to Rabi‘a bin Haram, from 
the tribe of Bani ‘Udhra. Rabi‘a took his wife and her baby to his homeland on the 
borders of Syria. When Qusai became a young man, he returned to Makkah, which 
was ruled by Halil bin Habsha from Khuza‘a, who gave Qusai his daughter, Hobba, as 
wife. After Halil’s death, a war between Khuza‘a and Quraish broke out and resulted 
in Qusai’s taking hold of Makkah and the Sacred House. [Ibn Hisham 1/117] 
The Reasons of this War have been illustrated in Three Versions 
The First: Having noticed the spread of his offspring, increase of his property and 
exalt of his honour after Halil’s death, Qusai found himself more entitled to shoulder 
responsibility of rulership over Makkah and custodianship of the Sacred House than 
the tribes of Khuza‘a and Bani Bakr. He also advocated that Quraish were the chiefs 
of Ishmael’s descendants. Therefore he consulted some men from Quraish and 
Kinana concerning his desire to evacuate Khuza‘a and Bani Bakr from Makkah. They 
took a liking to his opinion and supported him.  
The Second: Khuza‘a claimed that Halil requested Qusai to hold custodianship of Al-
Ka‘bah and rulership over Makkah after his death. 
The Third: Halil gave the right of Al-Ka‘bah service to his daughter Hobba and 
appointed Abu Ghabshan Al-Khuza‘i to function as her agent whereof. Upon Halil’s 
death, Qusai bought this right for a leather bag of wine, which aroused 
dissatisfaction among the men of Khuza‘a and they tried to keep the custodianship of 
the Sacred House away from Qusai. The latter, however, with the help of Quraish 
and Kinana, managed to take over and even to expel Khuza‘a completely from 
Makkah. [Rahmat-ul-lil'alameen 2/55