245
The Battle of Mu’tah 
It was the most significant and the fiercest battle during the lifetime of the 
Messenger of Allâh [pbuh], a preliminary and a prelude to the great conquests of the 
land of the Christians. It took place in Jumada Al-Ula 8 A.H. / September 629 A.D. 
Mu’tah is a village that lies on the borders of geographical Syria. 
The Prophet [pbuh] had sent Al-Harith bin ‘Umair Al-Azdi on an errand to carry a 
letter to the ruler of Busra. On his way, he was intercepted by Sharhabeel bin ‘Amr 
Al-Ghassani, the governor of Al-Balqa’ and a close ally to Caesar, the Byzantine 
Emperor. Al-Harith was tied and beheaded by Al-Ghassani. 
Killing envoys and messengers used to be regarded as the most awful crime, and 
amounted to the degree of war declaration. The Prophet [pbuh] was shocked on 
hearing the news and ordered that a large army of 3000 men be mobilized and 
despatched to the north to discipline the transgressors. [Za'd Al-Ma'ad 2/155; Fath 
Al-Bari 7/511] It was the largest Muslim army never mobilized on this scale except in 
the process of the Confederates Battle. 
Zaid bin Haritha was appointed to lead the army. Ja‘far bin Abi Talib would replace 
him if he was killed, and ‘Abdullah bin Rawaha would succeed Ja‘far in case the latter 
fell.[Sahih Al-Bukhari 2/611] A white banner was raised and handed over to Zaid. [Mukhtasar Seerat 
Ar-Rasool p.327] 
The Prophet [pbuh] recommended that they reach the scene of Al-Harith’s murder 
and invite the people to profess Islam. Should the latter respond positively, then no 
war would ensue, otherwise fighting them would be the only alternative left. 
He ordered them: 
"Fight the disbelievers in the Name of Allâh, neither breach a covenant nor 
entertain treachery, and under no circumstances a new-born, woman, an 
ageing man or a hermit should be killed; moreover neither trees should be 
cut down nor homes demolished. [Mukhtasar Seerat Ar-Rasool p.327; Rahmat-
ul-lil'alameen 2/271]" 
At the conclusion of the military preparations, the people of Madinah gathered and 
bade the army farewell. ‘Abdullah bin Rawaha began to weep at that moment, and 
when asked why he was weeping, he swore that it was not love for this world nor 
under a motive of infatuation with the glamour of life but rather the Words of Allâh 
speaking of Fire that he heard the Prophet [pbuh] reciting: 
"There is not one of you but will pass over it (Hell); this is with your Lord, a 
Decree which must be accomplished." [Al-Qur'an 19:71] 
The Muslim army then marched northward to Ma‘ân, a town bordering on 
geographical Syria. There news came to the effect that Heraclius had mobilized a 
hundred thousand troops together with another hundred thousand men of Lakham, 
Judham and Balqain — Arabian tribes allied to the Byzantines. The Muslims, on their 
part had never thought of encountering such a huge army. They were at a loss about 
what course to follow, and spent two nights debating these unfavourable conditions. 

246
Some suggested that they should write a letter to the Prophet [pbuh] seeking his 
advice. ‘Abdullah bin Rawaha was opposed to them being reluctant and addressed 
the Muslims saying: "I swear by Allâh that this very object which you hold in 
abhorrence is the very one you have set out seeking, martyrdom. In our fight we 
don’t count on number of soldiers or equipment but rather on the Faith that Allâh has 
honoured us with. Dart to win either of the two, victory or martyrdom." In the light 
of these words, they moved to engage with the enemy in Masharif, a town of Al-
Balqa’, and then changed direction towards Mu’tah where they encamped. The right 
flank was led by Qutba bin Qatadah Al-‘Udhari, and the left by ‘Ubadah bin Malik Al-
Ansari. Bitter fighting started between the two parties, three thousand Muslims 
against an enemy fiftyfold as large. 
Zaid bin Haritha, the closest to the Messenger’s heart, assumed leadership and 
began to fight tenaciously and in matchless spirit of bravery until he fell, fatally 
stabbed. Ja‘far bin Abi Talib then took the banner and did a miraculous job. In the 
thick of the battle, he dismounted, hamstrung his horse and resumed fighting until 
his right hand was cut off. He seized the banner with his left hand until this too was 
gone. He then clasped the banner with both arms until a Byzantine soldier struck and 
cut him into two parts. he was posthumously called "the flying Ja‘far" or "Ja‘far with 
two wings" because Allâh has awarded him two wings to fly wherever he desired 
there in the eternal Garden. Al-Bukhari reported fifty stabs in his body, none of them 
in the back. [Sahih Al-Bukhari 2/611] 
‘Abdullah bin Rawaha then proceeded to hold up the banner and fight bravely on his 
horseback while reciting enthusiastic verses until he too was killed. Thereupon a 
man, from Bani ‘Ajlan, called Thabit bin Al-Arqam took the banner and called upon 
the Muslims to choose a leader. The honour was unanimously granted to Khalid bin 
Al-Waleed, a skilled brave fighter and an outstanding strategist. It was reported by 
Al-Bukhari that he used nine swords that broke while he was relentlessly and 
courageously fighting the enemies of Islam. He, however, realizing the grave 
situation the Muslims were in, began to follow a different course of encounter, 
revealing the super strategy-maker, that Khalid was rightly called. He reshuffled the 
right and left flanks of the Muslim army and introduced forward a division from the 
rear in order to cast fear into the hearts of the Byzantine by deluding them that fresh 
reinforcements had arrived. The Muslims engaged with the enemies in sporadic 
skirmishes but gradually and judiciously retreating in a fully organized and well-
planned withdrawal. 
The Byzantines, seeing this new strategy, believed that they were being entrapped 
and drawn in the heart of the desert. They stopped the pursuit, and consequently the 
Muslims managed to retreat back to Madinah with the slightest losses. [Fath-Al-Bari 7/513, 
514; Za'd Al-Ma'ad 2/156] 
The Muslims sustained twelve martyrs, whereas the number of casualties among the 
Byzantines was unknown although the details of the battle point clearly to a large 
number. Even though the battle did not satisfy the Muslims’ objective, namely 
avenging Al-Harith’s murder, it resulted in a far-ranging impact and attached to the 
Muslims a great reputation in the battlefields. The Byzantine Empire, at that time, 
was a power to be reckoned with, and mere thinking of antagonizing it used to mean 
self-annihilation, let alone a three-thousand-soldier army going into fight against 
200,000 soldiers far better equipped and lavishly furnished with all luxurious 
conveniences. The battle was a real miracle proving that the Muslims were 
something exceptional not then familiar. Moreover, it gave evidence that Allâh 

247
backed them and their Prophet, Muhammad, was really Allâh’s Messenger. In the 
light