Matta[Rahmat-al-lil'alameen 1/178; Dr. Hamidullah said 
that his name was Binyamin], called Muqawqas, vicegerent of Egypt and Alexandria saying: 
"In the Name of Allâh, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful. 
From Muhammad slave of Allâh and His Messenger to Muqawqas, vicegerent of 
Egypt. 

223
Peace be upon him who follows true guidance. Thereafter, I invite you to accept 
Islam. Therefore, if you want security, accept Islam. If you accept Islam, Allâh, the 
Sublime, shall reward you doubly. But if you refuse to do so, you will bear the 
burden of the transgression of all the Copts. 
"Say (O Muhammad ([pbuh]: ‘O people of the Scripture (Jews and 
Christians), come to a word that is just between us and you, that we 
worship none but Allâh, and that we associate no partners with Him, and 
that none of us shall take others as lords besides Allâh.’ Then, if they turn 
away, say: ‘Bear witness that we are Muslims.’ " [Al-Qur'an 3:64] 
Hatib bin Abi Balta‘a, who was chosen to communicate the message, requested an 
audience with Muqawqas before imparting the contents of the letter. He addressed 
Egypt’s vicegerent saying: "There used to be someone before you who had arrogated 
the status of the Supreme Lord, so Allâh punished him and made an example of him 
in the Hereafter, and in this life; therefore, take warning and never set a bad 
example to others." Muqawqas answered: "We are in no position to relinquish our 
religion except for a better one." Hatib resumed: "We invite you to embrace Islam, 
which will suffice you all what you may lose. Our Prophet has called people to profess 
this Faith, Quraish and the Jews stood against him as bitter enemies, whereas 
Christians stood closest to his Call. Upon my life, Moses’s news about Christ is 
identical to the latter’s good tidings about the advent of Muhammad; likewise, this 
invitation of ours to you to embrace Islam is similar to your invitation to the people 
of Torah to accept the New Testament. Once a Prophet rises in a nation, he is eligible 
for positive response, hence you are subject to the same Divine Law. Bear in mind 
that we have not come to dissuade you from religion of Christ but rather bidding you 
to adhere to its tenets." Muqawqas meditated over the contents of the letter deeply 
and said: "I have come to the conviction that this Prophet bids nothing abominable; 
he is neither a straying magician nor a lying soothsayer. He bears the true manifest 
seeds of Prophethood, and so I will consider the affair deeply." He took the 
parchment and ordered that it be kept in an ivory casket. He called a scribe to write 
the following reply in Arabic: 
"In the Name of Allâh, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful. 
From Muqawqas to Muhammad bin ‘Abdullah. 
Peace be upon you. I have read your letter and understood its contents, and what 
you are calling for. I already know that the coming of a Prophet is still due, but I 
used to believe he would be born in Syria. I am sending you as presents two maids, 
who come from noble Coptic families; clothing and a steed for riding on. Peace be 
upon you." 
It is noteworthy that Muqawqas did not avail himself of this priceless opportunity and 
he did not embrace Islam. The presents were accepted; Maria, the first maid, stayed 
with the Prophet [pbuh], and gave birth