Confederates and Quraiza, the 
Prophet [pbuh] began to despatch punitive expeditions to force the aggressive tribes 
and rebellious Arabians to come to peaceful terms with the rising state of Islam. 
A platoon of thirty believers under the leadership of Muhammad bin Maslamah was 
despatched on a military mission in Muharram, the sixth year Hijri, following the two 
previous battles. It headed for the habitation of Bani Bakr sept. The Muslims 
attacked that sept and dispersed them in all directions. Plenty of spoils fell to the lot 
of the Muslims who returned home with a terrible disbeliever, Thumamah bin Uthal 
Al-Hanafi, chief of Bani Hanifa, who had gone out by order of Musailama, the Liar[As-
Seerah Al-Halabiyah 2/297], to assassinate the Prophet [pbuh]. The Prophet’s Companions 
tied him to a pole of the Prophetic Mosque. To a question posed by the Prophet 
[pbuh], Thumamah used to say: "If you were to kill someone, then you would have 
to choose one of noble descent, if you were to be gracious, then let it be to a grateful 
man and if you were to ask for money, you would have to ask for it from a generous 
man." He repeated that three times on three different occasions. On the third time, 
the Prophet [pbuh] ordered that he should be released. He soon went nearby, 
washed and then came back to profess the new faith addressing the Prophet [pbuh]: 
"No face had been more awful to me than yours but now it is the closest to my 
heart, no religion had ever been more repugnant to me than yours, now it is the 
dearest in my heart. Now I want to perform the ‘Umrah (lesser pilgrimage)." The 
Prophet [pbuh] gave him good tidings and asked him to do that. On his arrival in 
Makkah, the Quraishites accused him of apostasy. He denied it and affirmed that he 

205
had embraced Islam, and then swore that they would never get a grain from 
Yamama, a suburban area around Makkah, unless the Prophet [pbuh] would allow it. 
In fact, he did it and refused to send food supplies to Makkah until the Prophet 
[pbuh] interceded at the Makkans’ earnest plea.[Za'd Al-Ma'ad 2/119; Mukhtasar Seerat Ar-Rasool, 
p.292-293]  
Bani Lihyan Invasion 
Bani Lihyan had acted treacherously towards ten of the Prophet’s Companions and 
had them hanged. Their habitation being situated deep in the heart of Hijaz on the 
borders of Makkah, and due to deep-seated blood-revenge between the Muslims on 
the one hand, and Quraish and the Arabians on the other, the Prophet [pbuh] 
deemed it unwise to penetrate deep and come close to the greatest enemy, Quraish. 
However, when the power of the allied Confederates collapsed and they began to 
slacken and resign to the current unfavourable balance of power, the Messenger of 
Allâh [pbuh] seized this rare opportunity and decided that it was time to take 
revenge on Bani Lihyan. He set out in Rabi‘ Al-Awwal or Jumada Al-Ula in the year 
six Hijri at the head of two hundred Muslim fighters and made a feint of heading for 
Syria, then soon changed route towards Batn Gharran, the scene of his Companions’ 
tragedy, and invoked Allâh’s mercy on them. News of his march reached Bani Lihyan, 
who immediately fled to the mountain tops nearby and thus remained out of his 
reach. On his way back, the Prophet [pbuh] despatched a group of ten horsemen to 
a place called Kura‘ Al-Ghamim, in the vicinity of the habitation of Quraish in order to 
indirectly confirm his growing military power. All these skirmishes took fourteen 
days, after which he left back for home.  
Expeditions and Delegations continued 
1. A platoon led by ‘Ukasha bin Al-Mihsan was despatched to a place called Al-
Ghamir inhabited by Bani Asad in the year six Hijri. The enemy immediately 
fled leaving behind them two hundred camels which were taken to Madinah. 
2. A platoon led by Muhammad bin Maslamah set out towards the habitation of 
Bani Tha‘labah in Dhil Qassa. But a hundred men of the enemies ambushed 
and killed all of them except Muhammad bin Maslamah who managed to 
escape but badly wounded. 
3. In retaliation against Bani Tha‘labah, Abu ‘Ubaidah bin Al-Jarrah, at the head 
of forty men, was despatched to Dhil Qassa. They walked that night and took 
the enemy by surprise in the morning. Again, they fled to the mountains 
except one who was injured, and later embraced Islam. A lot of booty fell to 
their lot in that particular incident. 
4. A platoon, under the leadership of Zaid bin Haritha, was sent to Al-Jumum, 
the habitation of Bani Saleem, in the same year. A woman from Bani Muzaina 
showed them the way to the enemy’s camp. There the Muslims took some 
captives and gained a lot of booty. Later on, the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] 
granted the woman her freedom and married her to one of his followers. 
5. Zaid bin Haritha, in Jumada Al-Ula 6 Hijri, at the head of a hundred and 
seventy horsemen, set out to a place called Al-‘Ais, intercepted a caravan of 
Quraish led by Abul-‘As, the Prophet’s relative and looted their camels. Abul-
‘As escaped and took refuge in Zainab’s (his wife and the Prophet’s daughter) 
house. He begged her to ask the Prophet [pbuh] for the restitution of his 
wealth. The Prophet [pbuh] recommended, but without coercion, that the 

206
people do that. They immediately gave the man back all his wealth. He went 
back to Makkah, gave over the trusts to those entitled to them, embraced 
Islam and emigrated to Madinah where the Prophet [pbuh] reunited him with 
his wife, Zainab, after three and a half years of their first marriage contract. 
The verse relating to prohibition of marriage between women Muslims and 
disbelievers had not been revealed then. 
6. In Jumada Ath-Thania, the same year, Zaid at the head of fifteen men raided 
Bani Tha‘labah and captured twenty of their camels but the people had fled. 
7. In Rajab of the same year, Zaid, at the head of twelve men, set out to a place 
called Wadi Al-Qura in a reconnaissance mission to explore the movements of 
the enemy. The people there attacked the Muslims, killed nine of them, while 
the rest including Zaid bin Haritha managed to escape.[Rahmat-al-lil'alameen 2/226; Za'd 
Al-Ma'ad 2/120-122]  
8. The invasion of Al-Khabt (diluted yoghurt) took place in the year eight Hijri 
i.e. before Al-Hudaibiyah Treaty. Abu ‘Ubaidah bin Al-Jarrah led three 
hundred horsemen to observe a caravan belonging to Quraish. Because of the 
inadequacy of food supplies, they began to starve so much that they had 
Khabt (diluted yoghurt), hence the appellation "The Army of Al-Khabt". One of 
the men slaughtered nine camels at three times, three each time at different 
stages of the mission. Abu ‘Ubaidah, the leader of the campaign prohibited 
him from doing so. The sea was generous and presented them with an animal 
called Al-‘Anbar (sperm-whale) so rich in fat that they subsisted on it for half 
a month. When they came back home, they narrated the story to the Prophet 
[pbuh], who commented that it was provision granted by Allâh, and asked 
them to share him some of its meat.[Sahih Al-Bukhari 2/625,626; Sahih Muslim 2/145,146]  
This campaign came chronologically prior to Al-Hudaibiyah Treaty