Ibn Ishaq narrated on the authority of ‘Umar [R], "When I embraced Islam, I 
remembered the archenemy of Muhammad [pbuh] , i.e. Abu Jahl. I set out, and 
knocked at his door. When he came out to see me, I told him directly that I had 
embraced Islam. He immediately slammed the door repulsively denouncing my move 
as infamous and my face as ugly." In fact, ‘Umar’s conversion created a great deal of 
stir in Makkah that some people denounced him as an apostate, yet he would never 
waver in Faith, on the contrary, he persisted in his stance even at the peril of his life. 
The polytheists of Quraish marched towards his house with the intention of killing 
him. ‘Abdullah bin ‘Umar [R] narrated: While ‘Umar was at home in a state of fear, 
there came Al-‘As bin Wa’il As-Sahmy Abu ‘Amr, wearing an embroidered cloak and a 
shirt having silk hems. He was from the tribe of Bani Sahm who were our allies 
during the pre-Islamic period of ignorance. Al-‘As said to ‘Umar: What’s wrong with 
you? He said: Your people claim that they will kill me if I become a Muslim. Al-‘As 
said: Nobody will harm you after I have given protection to you. So Al-‘As went out 
and met the people streaming in the whole valley. He said: Where are you going? 
They replied: We want son of Al-Khattab who has embraced Islam. Al-‘As said: There 
is no way for anybody to touch him. So the people retreated. [Bukhari 1/545; Ibn 
Hisham 1/349] 
With respect to the Muslims in Makkah, ‘Umar’s conversion had a different 
tremendous impact. Mujahid, on the authority of Ibn Al-‘Abbas [R], related that he 

72
had asked ‘Umar bin Al-Khattab why he had been given the epithet of Al-Farouque 
(he who distinguishes truth from falsehood), he replied: After I had embraced Islam, 
I asked the Prophet [pbuh]: ‘Aren’t we on the right path here and Hereafter?’ The 
Prophet [pbuh] answered: ‘Of course you are! I swear by All?  in Whose Hand my 
soul is, that you are right in this world and in the hereafter.’ I, therefore, asked the 
Prophet [pbuh] ‘Why we then had to conduct clandestine activism. I swear by All?
 
Who has sent you with the Truth, that we will leave our concealment and proclaim 
our noble cause publicly.’ We then went out in two groups, Hamzah leading one and 
I the other. We headed for the Mosque in broad daylight when the polytheists of 
Quraish saw us, their faces went pale and got incredibly depressed and resentful. On 
that very occasion, the Prophet [pbuh] attached to me the epithet of Al-Farouque. 
Ibn Mas‘ud [R] related that they (the Muslims) had never been able to observe their 
religious rites inside the Holy Sanctuary except when ‘Umar embraced Islam. [Ibn 
Hisham; Tareekh 'Umar bin Al-Khattab, p.13; Mukhtasar As-Seerah p.103] 
Suhaib bin Sinan [R], in the same context, said that it was only after ‘Umar’s 
conversion, that we started to proclaim our Call, assemble around and 
circumambulate the Sacred House freely. We even dared retaliate against some of 
the injustices done to harm us. In the same context, Ibn Mas‘ud said: We have been 
strengthened a lot since ‘Umar embraced Islam.  
Quraish’s Representative negotiates with the Messenger of All?  [pbuh] 
Shortly after the conversion of these two powerful heroes, Hamzah bin ‘Abdul-
Muttalib and ‘Umar bin Al-Khattab[R] , the clouds of tyranny and oppression started 
to clear away and the polytheists realized that it was no use meting out torture to 
the Muslims. They c