[Za'd Al-Ma'ad 2/46] 
Abu Talib wisely and quietly took stock of the situation and decided to withdraw to a 
valley on the eastern outskirts of Makkah. Banu Hashim and Banu Al-Muttalib, who 
followed suit, were thus confined within a narrow pass (Shi‘b of Abu Talib), from the 
beginning of Muharram, the seventh year of Muhammad’s mission till the tenth year, 
viz., a period of three years. It was a stifling siege. The supply of food was almost 
stopped and the people in confinement faced great hardships. The idolaters used to 
buy whatever food commodities entered Makkah lest they should leak to the people 
in Ash-Shi‘b, who were so overstrained that they had to eat leaves of trees and skins 
of animals. Cries of little children suffering from hunger used to be heard clearly. 
Nothing to eat reached them except, on few occasions, some meagre quantities of 
food were smuggled by some compassionate Makkans. During ‘the prohibited 
months’ — when hostilities traditionally ceased, they would leave their confinement 
and buy food coming from outside Makkah. Even then, the food stuff was unjustly 
overpriced so that their financial situation would fall short of finding access to it. 
Hakeem bin Hizam was once on his way to smuggle some wheat to his aunt Khadijah 
[R]Ç when Abu Jahl intercepted and wanted to debar him. Only when Al-Bukhtari 
intervened, did Hakeem manage to reach his destination. Abu Talib was so much 
concerned about the personal safety of his nephew. Whenever people retired to 
sleep, he would ask the Prophet [pbuh] to lie in his place, but when all the others fell 
asleep, he would order him to change his place and take another, all of which in an 
attempt to trick a potential assassin. 
Despite all odds, Muhammad [pbuh] persisted in his line and his determination and 
courage never weakened. He continued to go to Al-Ka‘bah and to pray publicly. He 

76
used every opportunity to preach to outsiders who visited Makkah for business or on 
pilgrimage during the sacred months and special seasons of assemblies. 
This situation ultimately created dissension amongst the various Makkan factions, 
who were tied with the besieged people by blood relations. After three years of 
blockade and in Muharram, the tenth year of Muhammad’s mission, the pact was 
broken. Hisham bin ‘Amr, who used to smuggle some food to Bani Hashim secretly at 
night, went to see Zuhair bin Abi Omaiyah Al-Makhzoumy and reproached him for 
resigning to that intolerable treatment meted out to his uncles in exile. The latter 
pleaded impotence, but agreed to work with Hisham and form a pressure group that 
would secure the extrication of the exiles. On the ground of motivation by uterine 
relations, there emerged a group of five people who set out to abrogate the pact and 
declare all relevant clauses null and void. They were Hisham bin ‘Amr, Zuhair bin Abi 
Omaiya, Al-Mut‘im bin ‘Adi, Abu Al-Bukhtari and Zam‘a bin Al-Aswad. They decided 
to meet in their assembly place and start their self-charged mission from the very 
precinct of the Sacred House. Zuhair, after circumambulating seven times, along 
with his colleagues approached the hosts of people there and rebuked them for 
indulging in the amenities of life whereas their kith and kin of Bani Hashim were 
perishing on account of starvation and economic boycott. They swore they would 
never relent until the parchment of boycott was torn to piece and the pact broken at 
once. Abu Jahl, standing nearby, retorted that it would never be torn. Zam‘a was 
infuriated and accused Abu Jahl of telling lies, adding that the pact was established 
and the parchment was written without seeking their approval. Al-Bukhtari 
intervened and backed Zam‘a. Al-Mut‘im bin ‘Adi and Hisham bin ‘Amr attested to 
the truthfulness of their two companions. Abu Jahl, with a cunning attempt to 
liquidate the hot argument that was running counter to his malicious goals, answered 
that the issue had already been resolved sometime and somewhere before. 
Abu Talib meanwhile was sitting in a corner of the Mosque. He came to communicate 
to them that a Revelation had been sent to his nephew, the Prophet [pbuh] to the 
effect that ants had eaten away all their proclamation that smacked of injustice and 
aggression except those parts that bore the Name of Allâh. He contended that he 
would be ready to give Muhammad [pbuh] up to them if his words proved untrue, 
otherwise, they would have to recant and repeal their boycott. The Makkans agreed 
to the soundness of his proposition. Al-Mut‘im went to see the parchment and there 
he did discover that it was eaten away by ants and nothing was left save the part 
bearing (in the Name of Allâh). 
The proclamation was thus abrogated, and Muhammad [pbuh] and the other people 
were permitted to leave Ash-Sh‘ib and return home. In the context of this trial to 
which the Muslims were subjected, the polytheists had a golden opportunity to 
experience a striking sign of Muhammad’s Prophethood (the white ants eating away 
the parchment) but to their miserable lot they desisted and augmented in disbel