field, and the fierceness of the Fight 
The Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] ordered his uncle Al-‘Abbas — who was a sonorous 
voiced man — to call out on the followers. As loudly as he could, Al-‘Abbas shouted: 
"Where are the lancers?" "By Allâh," Al-‘Abbas said, "Upon hearing my voice calling 
them back, they turned round to the battlefield as if they had been oryxes (wild 
cows) tending towards their calves." 
"Here we are, at your service. Here we are."[Sahih Muslim 2/100] They said. There you see 
them trying to stop their camels and reverse to the battle. He who was unable to 
force his camel to turn back, would take his armour, fling it round his neck, and 
hastily dismount his camel with his weapon in his hand letting his camel move freely 
and run towards the voice source. Voices would grow louder and louder till a hundred 
of them gathered round the Prophet and resumed the fight. 
Those who were called out upon next were Al-Ansar, the Helpers, "O, folks of Al-
Ansar! Folks of Al-Ansar!" 
The last group to be called out upon were Bani Al-Harith bin Al-Khazraj. Muslims 
battalions poured successively into the battlefield in the same manner that they had 
left it. The stamina of both parties was superb. Both of them stoodfast and fought 
fiercely. The Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] was so eagerly and furiously watching the 
battle that he said: 
"Now the fight has grown fierce." 
Picking up a handful of earth, he hurled it at their faces while saying: 
"May your faces be shameful." 
Their eyes were thick with dust and the enemy began to retreat in utter confusion. 
  Reverse of Fortunes and the Enemy’s utter Defeat 
Few hours had elapsed since the earth-handful was hurled at the enemy’s faces, 
when they were shatteringly defeated. About seventy men of Thaqif alone were 
killed, and the Muslims plundered all their riding camels, weapons and cattle. 
Allâh, Glory is to Him, alluded to this sudden change in the Qur’ân when He said: 
"…and on the Day of Hunain (battle) when you rejoiced at your great 
number but it availed you naught and the earth, vast as it is, was straitened 
for you, then you turned back in flight. Then Allâh did send down His 
Sakinah (calmness, tranquillity, and reassurance, etc.) on the Messenger 

262
(Muhammad [pbuh]) and on the believers, and sent down forces (angels) 
which you saw not, and punished the disbelievers. Such is the recompense 
of disbelievers." [Al-Qur'an 9:25,26] 
  Hot Pursuit of the Enemy 
After their defeat, some enemy troops headed for Ta’if, others to Nakhlah and Awtas. 
A group of Muslims headed by Abu ‘Amir Al-Ash‘ ari, were despatched to chase the 
enemy, some skirmishes took place during which Abu ‘Amir was killed. 
A similar battalion of horsemen pursued the idolaters who threaded the track to 
Nakhlah and caught up with Duraid bin As-Simmah, who was killed by Rabi‘a bin 
Rafi‘. After collecting the booty, the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] left for Ta’if to face 
the greatest number of the defeated idolaters. The booty was six thousand captives, 
twenty four thousand camels; over forty thousand sheep and four thousand silver 
ounces. The Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] gave orders that booty should be confined at 
Al-J‘iranah and ordained Mas‘ud bin ‘Amr Al-Ghifari to be in charge of it. It was only 
when he was entirely free from Ta’if Campaign, that one of the captives As-Shaimâ’, 
the daughter of Al-Harith As-Sa‘diya, the Messenger’s foster sister was brought to 
the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh], she introduced herself to him. Upon recognizing her 
by a certain mark, he honoured her, spread for her his garment and seated her on it. 
He was graceful and release