ssessed of lucid mind.          

317
The Prophet [pbuh], Attributes and Manners 
The Prophet [pbuh] combined both perfection of creation and perfection of manners. 
This impression on people can be deduced by the bliss that overwhelmed their hearts 
and filled them with dignity. Men’s dignity, devotion and estimation of the Messenger 
of Allâh [pbuh] were unique and matchless. No other man in the whole world has 
been so honoured and beloved. Those who knew him well, were fascinated and 
enchanted by him. They were ready to sacrifice their lives for the sake of saving a 
nail of his from hurt or injury. Being privileged by lots of prerogatives of perfection 
that no one else had been endowed with, his Companions found that he was peerless 
and so they loved him. 
Here we list a brief summary of the versions about his beauty and perfection. To 
encompass all which is, addmittedly, beyond our power.  
Beauty of Creation 
Describing the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh], who passed by her tent on his journey of 
migration, Umm Ma‘bad Al-Khuza‘iyah said to her husband: 
"He was innocently bright and had broad countenance. His manners were fine. Neither was his belly 
bulging out nor was his head deprived of hair. He had black attractive eyes finely arched by continuous 
eyebrows. His hair glossy and black, inclined to curl, he wore long. His voice was extremely commanding. 
His head was large, well formed and set on a slender neck. His expression was pensive and contemplative, 
serene and sublime. The stranger was fascinated from the distance, but no sooner he became intimate with 
him than this fascination was changed into attachment and respect. His expression was very sweet and 
distinct. His speech was well set and free from the use of superfluous words, as if it were a rosary of beads. 
His stature was neither too high nor too small to look repulsive. He was a twig amongst the two, singularly 
bright and fresh. He was always surrounded by his Companions. Whenever he uttered something, the 
listeners would hear him with rapt attention and whenever he issued any command, they vied with each 
other in carrying it out. He was a master and a commander. His utterances were marked by truth and 
sincerity, free from all kinds of falsehoods and lies."[Za'd Al-Ma'ad 2/45] 
Ali bin Abi Talib describing him said: "The Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] was neither excessively tall nor 
extremely short. He was medium height among his friends. His hair was neither curly nor wavy. It was in 
between. It was not too curly nor was it plain straight. It was both curly and wavy combined. His face was 
not swollen or meaty-compact. It was fairly round. His mouth was white. He had black and large eyes with 
long haired eyelids. His joints (limbs) and shoulder joints were rather big. He had a rod-like little hair 
extending from his chest down to his navel, but the rest of his body was almost hairless. He had thick hand 
palms and thick fingers and toes. At walking, he lifted his feet off the ground as if he had been walking in a 
muddy remainder of water. When he turned, he turned all. The Prophethood Seal was between his 
shoulders. He is the Seal of Prophets, the most generous and the bravest of all. 
His speech was the most reliable. He was the keenest and the most attentive to people’s trust and was very 
careful to pay people’s due in full. The Prophet [pbuh] was the most tractable and the most yielding 
companion, seeing him unexpectedly you fear him and venerate him. He who has acquaintance with him 
will like him. He who describes him says:   
‘I have never seen such a person neither before nor after seeing him.’ " [Ibn Hisham 1/401; Jami' At-Tirmidhi 
4/303]  

318
Jabir bin Samurah reported that Allâh’s Messenger [pbuh] had a broad face with reddish (wide) eyes and 
lean heels. [Sahih Al-Muslim 2/258] 
Abu At-Tufail said: "He was white, good-looking. He was neither fat nor thin; neither tall nor short." 
Anas bin Malik said: "He had unfolded hands and was pink-coloured. He was neither white nor brown. He 
was rather whitish. In both his head and beard there were as many as twenty grey hairs, besides some grey 
hairs at his temples." In another version: "and some scattered white hairs in his head." [Sahih Al-Bukhari 1/502] 
Abu Juhaifa said: "I have seen some grey colour under his lower lip." Al-Bara’ said: "He was of medium 
height, broad-shouldered, his hair went up to his earlobes. I saw him dressed in a red garment and I (assure 
you) I have never seen someone more handsome. At first he used to let his hair loose so as to be in 
compliance with the people of the Book; but later on he used to part it." [ibid 1/503] 
Al-Bara’ also said: "He had the most handsome face and the best character." When he was asked: "Was the 
Messenger’s face sword-like?" "No," he said: "it was moon-like." But in another version: he said, "His face 
was round." Ar-Rabi‘ bint Muawwidh said: "Had you seen him, you would have felt that the sun was 
shining." Jabir bin Samurah said, "I saw him at one full-moony night. I looked at him. He was dressed in a 
red garment. I compared him with the moon and found that — for me — he was better than the moon." 
[Mishkat Al-Masabeeh 2/518] 
Abu Huraira said: "I have never seen a thing nicer than the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh]. It seems as if the 
sunlight were moving within his face. I have never seen one who is faster in pace than the Messenger of 
Allâh [pbuh]. It seemed as if the earth had folded itself up to shorten the distance for him. For we used to 
wear ourselves out while he was at full ease." [ibid 2/518] 
Ka‘b bin Malik said: "When he was pleased, his face would shine with so bright light that you would 
believe that it was a moon-piece." [Sahih Al-Bukhari 1/502] Once he sweated hot at ‘Aishah’s, and the 
features of his face twinkled; so I recited a poem by Abu Kabeer Al-Hudhali:  
"If you watch his face-features, you will see them twinkling like the lightning of an approaching rain." 
[Rahmat-ul-lil'alameen 2/72]  
Whenever Abu Bakr saw him he would say:   
"He is faithful, chosen (by Allâh), and calls for forgiveness. He shines like a full-moon light when it is far 
from dark (clouds)." [Khulasa As-Siyar p.20]  
‘Umar used to recite verses by Zuhair describing Haram bin Sinan:  
"Were you other than a human being, you would be a lighted moon at a full-moon night."  
Then he would add: "Thus was the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh]. [ibid]  
When he got angry his face would go so red that you would think it were "an 
inflected red skin-spot with pomegranate grains on both cheeks." [Mishkat Al-Masabeeh 1/22] 
Jabir bin Samurah said: "His legs were gentle, delicate and in conformity. His 
laughter is no more than smiling. Looking at him will make you say ‘He is black-eyed 
though he is not so.’" [Jami' At-Tirmidhi 4/306] 

319
Ibn Al-‘Abbas said: "His two front teeth were splitted so whenever he speaks, light 
goes through them. His neck was as pure and silvery as a neck of doll. His eyelids 
were long haired but his beard was thick. His forehead was broad; but his eyebrows 
were like the metal piece attached to a lance, but they were unhorned. His nose was 
high-tipped, middle-cambered with narrow nostrils. His cheeks were plain, but he 
had (little hair) running down like a rod from his throat to his navel. He had hair 
neither on his abdomen nor on his chest except some on his arms and shoulders. His 
chest was broad and flatted. He had long forearms with expansive palms of the 
hand. His legs were plain straight and stretching down. His other limbs were straight 
too. The two hollows of his soles hardly touch the ground. When he walks away he 
vanishes soon; but he walks at ease (when he is not in a hurry). The way he walks 
seems similar to one who is leaning forwards and is about to fall down." [Khulasa As-Siyar 
p.19,20] 
Anas said: "I have never touched silk or a silky garment softer than the palm of the 
Prophet’s [pbuh]; nor have I smelt a perfume or any scent nicer than his." In 
another version, "I have never smelt ambergris nor musk nor any other thing 
sweeter than the scent and the smell of the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh]." 
Abu Juhaifa said: "I took his hand and put it on my head and I found that it was 
colder than ice and better scented than the musk perfume." [Sahih Al-Bukhari 1/503] 
Jabir bin Samurah — who was a little child then — said: "When he wiped my cheek, I 
felt it was cold and scented as if it had been taken out of a shop of a perfume 
workshop." [Sahih Muslim 2/256] 
Anas said, "His sweat was pearl-like." Umm Sulaim said: "His sweat smelt nicer than 
the nicest perfume." 
Jabir said: "Whoever pursues a road that has been trodden by the Messenger of 
Allâh [pbuh], will certainly scent his smell and will be quite sure that the Messenger 
of Allâh [pbuh] has already passed it." The Seal of Prophethood, which was similar in 
size to a pigeon’s egg, was between his shoulders on the left side hav