Ar-Raji‘ 
In Safar of the fourth year A.H., a delegation from the tribes of ‘Udal and Qarah 
came to Madinah and asked the Prophet [pbuh] to send a group of Companions to 
instruct them in religion, claiming the existence of some Muslims among them. He 
sent six of his Companions, in another version, ten headed by Murthid bin Abi 
Murthid Al-Ghanawi, or, according to Al-Bukhari, ‘Asim bin Thabit, the grandfather of 
‘Asim bin ‘Umar bin Al-Khattab. When they reached a spot called Ar-Raji‘ between 
Rabigh and Jeddah, a hundred archers of Banu Lihyan clan surrounded the place and 
attacked them. The delegation of Muslims took shelter on some high ground, Fudfud, 
and the bedouins offered them a pledge that they would not be killed. ‘Asim refused 
to come down, instead he fought them until he and six of his companions were 
killed. Three men were left, Khubaib, Zaid bin Ad-Dathna and another one. Once 
again, the bedouins offered them a guarantee of safety and they accepted. When 
they descended, the bedouins treacherously bound them. The third man rebuked 
them for their insincerity and resisted them so they killed him. The other two men 
who had killed some notables of Quraish at Badr were taken and sold in Makkah. The 
first was Khubaib who was detained for some time and then it was unanimously 
decided to crucify him. He was taken from the Holy Sanctuary to At-Tan‘im for 
crucifixion. He requested a respite to offer a two-Rak‘a prayer. After the final 
greeting, he turned to his executioners, and said: "Had I not been afraid that you 
would think that I was afraid of death, I would have prayed for a long time." It was 
then that Khubaib first set the tradition of praying two Rak‘a before being executed. 
He then said: 
"O Lord! Count them one by one, exterminate them to the last one." 
He then recited some verses of poetry which speak eloquently of the atrocities borne 
by him, and testify to his Faith in Allâh at this hour of suffering: 
The confederates have gathered their tribes around me, 
And summoned all of them who could come. 
They have gathered their women and children, 
I am bound fastly to a lofty trunk. 
To Allâh alone I complain of my helplessness and sufferings, 
And of the death, the confederates have prepared for me. 
Lord of the Throne! Give me endurance against their design, 
They have cut my flesh bit by bit, and I have been deprived of sustenance. 
They let me choose infidelity but death is preferable, 
Tears roll out of my eyes, though not of fear. 
By Allâh! I fear not if I die a Muslim, 
On what side I fall for the sake of Allâh. 
I will not show subservience to the enemy, 
If Lord so desires, He will bless my torn limbs and broken joints. 
Abu Sufyan then addressed him saying: "I adjure you by Allâh, don’t you wish that 
Muhammad [pbuh] were here in your place so that we might cut off his head, and 

188
that you were with your family?" Khubaib answered, "By Allâh, I do not wish that 
Muhammad [pbuh] now were in the place I occupy or that a thorn could hurt him, 
and that I were sitting with my family." Quraish ordered ‘Uqbah bin Al-Harith, whose 
father had been killed by Khubaib himself, to crucify him. They also appointed 
someone to guard his corpse. ‘Amr bin Oma