on." 
‘Umar directed his footsteps to his sister’s house. As he drew near, he heard the 
voice of Khabbab bin Aratt, who was reading the Qur’? ic Chapter T?H?/i> (mystic 
letters, T. H.) to both of them. Khabbab, perceiving the noise of his footsteps retired 
to a closet. Fatimah, ‘Umar’s sister, took hold of the leaf and hid it. But ‘Umar had 
already heard the voice. "What sound was that I have heard just now?" shouted the 
son of Khattab, entering angrily. Both his sister and her husband replied, "You heard 
nothing." "Nay," said he swearing fiercely, "I have heard that you have apostatized." 
He plunged forward towards his brother-in-law and beat him severely, but Fatimah 
rushed to the rescue of her husband. Thereupon, ‘Umar fell upon his sister and 
struck upon her head. The husband and wife could not contain themselves and cried 
aloud: "Yes, we are Muslims, we believe in All?  and His Messenger Muhammad 
[pbuh] so do what you will." When ‘Umar saw the face of his dear sister besmeared 
with blood, he was softened and said: "Let me see what you were reading, so that I 
may see what Muhammad [pbuh] has brought." Fatimah was satisfied with the 
assurance, but said: "O brother, you are unclean on account of your idolatry, none 
but the pure may touch it. So go and wash first." He did so, and took the page and 
read the opening verses of the Chapter T?H?/i> until he reached: 

71
"Verily! I am All? ! L?il? a illa Ana (none has the right to be worshipped but I), so 
worship Me and offer prayers perfectly (Iq? at-as-Sal? ), for My Remembrance." [Al-
Qur'an 20:14]. 
‘Umar read the verses with great interest and was much entranced with them. "How 
excellent it is, and how graceful! Please guide me to Muhammad [pbuh] ." said he. 
And when he heard that, Khabbab came out of concealment and said, "O ‘Umar, I 
hope that All?  has answered the prayer of the Prophet [pbuh] , for I heard him say: 
‘O All? ! Strengthen Islam through either ‘Umar bin Al-Khattab or Abu Jahl bin 
Hisham.’" ‘Umar then left for a house in Safa where Muhammad [pbuh] had been 
holding secret meetings along with his Companions. ‘Umar reached that place with 
the sword swinging by his arm. He knocked at the door. The Companions of the 
Prophet [pbuh] turned to see who the intruder was. One of them peeped through a 
chink in the door and reeled back exclaiming: "It is ‘Umar with his sword." Hamzah, 
dispelling the fears of his friends, said: "Let him in. As a friend he is welcome. As a 
foe, he will have his head cut off with his own sword." The Prophet [pbuh] asked his 
Companions to open the door. In came the son of Khattab. The Prophet [pbuh] 
advanced to receive the dreadful visitor, caught him by his garment and scabbard, 
and asked him the reason of his visit. At that ‘Umar replied: "O Messenger of All?
 
[pbuh] , I come to you in order to believe in All?  and his Messenger and that which 
he has brought from his Lord." Filled with delight, Muhammad [pbuh] together with 
his Companions, cried aloud: ‘All? u Akbar’ (All?  is Great). [Tareekh 'Umar bin Al-
Khattab, p7-11; Ibn Hisham 1/343]