rruption of Revelation 
Ibn Sa‘d reported on the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas that the Revelation paused for a few 
days.[Fath Al-Bari 1/27,12/360] After careful study, this seems to be the most 
possible. To say that it lasted for three and a half years, as some scholars allege, is 
not correct, but here there is no room to go into more details. 
Meanwhile, the Prophet [pbuh], was caught in a sort of depression coupled with 
astonishment and perplexity. Al-Bukhari reported: 
The Divine inspiration paused for a while and the Prophet [pbuh] became so sad, as 
we have heard, that he intended several times to throw himself from the tops of high 
mountains, and every time he went up the top of a mountain in order to throw 
himself down, Gabriel would appear before him and say: "O Muhammad! You are 
indeed All? ’s Messenger in truth," whereupon his heart would become quiet and he 
would calm down and return home. Whenever the period of the coming of the 
Revelation used to become long, he would do as before, but Gabriel would appear 
again before him and say to him what he had said before. [Bukhari 2/340]  
Once more, Gabriel brings All? ’s Revelation 
Ibn Hajar said: ‘That (the pause of All? ’s revelation for a few days) was to relieve 
the Messenger of All?  [pbuh] of the fear he experienced and to make him long for 
the Revelation. When the shades of puzzle receded, the flags of truth were raised, 
the Messenger of All?  [pbuh] knew for sure that he had become the Messenger of 
the Great Lord. He was also certain that what had come to him was no more than 

45
the ambassador of inspiration. His waiting and longing for the coming of the 
revelation constituted a good reason for his steadfastness and self-possession on the 
arrival of All? ’s inspiration, Al-Bukhari reported on the authority of Jabir bin 
‘Abdullah that he had heard the Messenger of All?  [pbuh] speak about the period of 
pause as follows: 
"While I was walking, I heard a voice from the sky. I looked up, and surely enough, 
it was the same angel who had visited me in the cave of Hira’. He was sitting on a 
chair between the earth and the sky. I was very afraid of him and knelt on the 
ground. I went home saying: ‘Cover me …, Cover me …’. All?  revealed to me the 
verses:  
‘O you (Muhammad [pbuh]) enveloped (in garments)! Arise and warn! And 
your Lord (All? ) magnify! And your garments purify! And keep away from 
Ar-Rujz (the idols)!’" [Al-Qur'an 74:1-5] 
A