thentic records of the biography of the Prophet [pbuh] show that it had 
occurred to the Makkan leaders to credit Muhammad [pbuh] with ambition. They, 
therefore, time and again plied him with temptation. One day some of the important 
men of Makkah gathered in the enclosure of Al-Ka‘bah, and ‘Utbah bin Rabi‘a, a chief 
among them, offered to approach the Prophet [pbuh] and contract a bargain with 
him whereby they give him whatever worldly wealth he asks for, on condition that he 
keep silent and no longer proclaim his new faith. The people of Quraish endorsed his 
proposal and requested him to undertake that task. ‘Utbah came closer to 
Muhammad [pbuh] and addressed him in the following words: 
We have seen no other man of Arabia, who has brought so great a calamity to a 
nation, as you have done. You have outraged our gods and religion and taxed our 
forefathers and wise men with impiety and error and created strife amongst us. You 
have left no stone unturned to estrange the relations with us. If you are doing all this 
with a view to getting wealth, we will join together to give you greater riches than 
any Quraishite has possessed. If ambition moves you, we will make you our chief. If 
you desire kingship we will readily offer you that. If you are under the power of an 
evil spirit which seems to haunt and dominate you so that you cannot shake off its 
yoke, then we shall call in skilful physicians to cure you. 
"Have you said all?" asked Muhammad [pbuh]; and then hearing that all had been 
said, he spoke forth, and said: 

73
"In the Name of All? , the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful. H?M? . [These letters 
are one of the miracles of the Qur’? , and none but All?  (Alone) knows their 
meanings]. A revelation from All? , the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful. A Book 
whereof the verses are explained in detail; — a Qur’?  in Arabic for people who 
know. Giving glad tidings [of Paradise to the one who believes in the Oneness of All?
 
(i.e. Islamic Monotheism) and fears All?  much (abstains from all kinds of sins and 
evil deeds.) and loves All?  much (performing all kinds of good deeds which He has 
ordained)], and warning (of punishment in the Hell-fire to the one who disbelieves in 
the Oneness of All? ), but most of them turn away, so they listen not. And they say: 
Our hearts are under coverings (screened) from that to which you invite us …" [Al-
Qur'an 41: 1-5] 
The Messenger of All?  [pbuh] went on reciting the Chapter while ‘Utbah sitting and 
listening attentively with his hand behind his back to support him. When the 
Messenger reached the verse that required prostration, he immediately prostrated 
himself. After that, he turned to ‘Utbah saying: "Well Abu Al-Waleed! You have heard 
my reply, you are now free to do whatever you please." ‘Utbah then retired to his 
company to apprise them of the Prophet’s attitude. When his compatriots saw him, 
they swore that he had returned to them with a countenance unlike the one he had 
before meeting the Prophet [pbuh] . He immediately communicated to them the 
details of the talk he gave and the reply he received, and appended saying: "I have 
never heard words similar to those ones he recited. They definitely relate neither to 
poetry nor to witchcraft nor do they derive from soothsaying. O people of Quraish! I 
request you to heed my advice and grant the man full freedom to pursue his goals, 
in which case you could safely detach yourselves from him. I swear that his words 
bear a supreme Message. Should the other Arabs rid you of him, they will then spare 
you the trouble, on the other hand if he accedes to power over the Arabs, then you 
will bask in his kingship and share him his might." These words of course fell on deaf 
ears, and did not appeal to the infidels, who jeered at ‘Utbah and claimed that the 
Prophet [pbuh] had bewitched him. [Ibn Hisham 1/293,294] 
In another version of the same event, it is related that ‘Utbah went on attentively 
listening to the Prophet [pbuh] until the latter began to recite All? ’s Words: 
"But if they turn away, they say (O Muhammad [pbuh] ): "I have warned you of a 
Sa‘iqa (a destructive awful cry, torment, hit, a thunder-bolt) like the Sa‘iqa which 
overtook ‘Ad and Tham?  (people)." [Al-Qur'an 41:13] 
Here ‘Utbah