other instance of the atrocities of the polytheist Makkans, as regards 
migration, is Suhaib. This man expressed his wish to migrate and of course 
this was a source of indignation to the disbelievers. They began to insult him 
claiming that he had come into Makkah as a worthless tramp, but their town 
was gracious enough and thanks to them he managed to make a lot of money 
and become wealthy. They gave orders that he would not leave. Seeing this, 
he offered to give away all his wealth to them. They eventually agreed to 
release him on that condition. The Prophet heard this story and commented 
on it saying:  
"Suhaib is the winner, after all." [Ibn Hisham 1/477] 
3. Then, there was the story of ‘Umar bin Al-Khattab, ‘Ayyash bin Abi Rabi‘a and 
Hisham bin Al-‘Asi, who agreed to meet at a certain place one morning in 
order to leave for Madinah; ‘Umar and ‘Ayyash came but Hisham was 
detained by the Makkans.  
Shortly afterwards Abu Jahl, and his brother Al-Harith came to Madinah to see their 
third brother ‘Ayyash. They cunningly tried to touch the most sensitive area in man, 
i.e. his relation with his mother. They addressed him claiming that his mother had 

100
sworn she would never comb her hair, nor shade herself off the sun unless she had 
seen him. ‘Ayyash took pity on his mother, but ‘Umar was intelligent enough to 
understand that they wanted to entice ‘Ayyash away from Islam so he cautioned him 
against their tricks, and added "your mother would comb her hair if lice pestered 
her, and would shade herself off if the sun of Makkah got too hot for her." These 
words notwithstanding, ‘Ayyash was determined to go and see his mother, so ‘Umar 
gave him his manageable docile camel advising him to stick to its back because it 
would provide rescue for him if he perceived anything suspicious on their part. The 
party of three then set forth towards Makkah. As soon as they covered part of the 
distance, Abu Jahl complained about his camel and requested ‘Ayyash to allow him to 
ride behind him on his camel. When they knelt down to the level of the ground, the 
two polytheists fell upon ‘Ayyash and tied him. They ro