er a skirmish carried out against a platoon of Bani 
Fazarah. The place by which it was fought is known as Dhu Qarad, a reservoir of 
water at a day’s journey from Madinah. According to the majority of scholars, this 
incident took place three days before the battle of Khaibar. 
It has been narrated on the authority of Salamah bin Al-Akwa‘, the hero of this 
battle, that the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] sent his hireling Rabah, with his camels to 
a nearby pasture. I, taking Talhah’s horse, went there for the same purpose. When 
the day dawned, ‘Abdur Rahman Al-Fazari made a raid, drove away all the camels, 
and killed the man who looked after them. I told Rabah to ride the horse, take it to 
Talhah and inform the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] that the polytheists had made 
away with his camels. Then I stood upon a hillock and turning my face to Madinah, 
shouted thrice: "Come to our help!" After that I set out in pursuit of the raiders, 
shooting at them with arrows and chanting (self-eulogatory) verse: 
I am the son of Al-Akwa‘ 
Today is the day of defeat for the mean. 
By Allâh, I continued shooting at them and hamstringing their animals. Whenever a 
horseman turned upon me, I would come to a tree (hid myself) sitting at its base, 
shoot at him and hamstring his horse. At last they entered a narrow mountain gorge. 
I ascended that mountain and held them at bay throwing stones at them. I continued 
to chase them in this way until I got all the camels released with no one left with 
them. They fled in all directions and I following and shooting at them continually 
until they dropped more than thirty mantles and thirty lances, lightening their 
burden. On everything they dropped, I put a mark with a stone so that the 
Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] and his Companions might recognize them (that it was 
booty left by the enemy). They went on until they came to a narrow valley. They sat 
down to eat something, and I sat on the top of a tapering rock. Four of them 
ascended the mountain coming towards me. When they were near enough to hear 
me, I shouted: "Do you recognize me?" They said: "No. Who are you?" I said: "I am 
Salamah son of Al-Akwa‘. I can kill anyone of you I like but none of you can kill me." 
So they returned. I did not move from my place until I saw the horsemen of the 
Messenger of Allâh [pbuh], who came riding through the trees. The foremost among 
them was Akhram, behind him was Abu Qatadah Al-Ansari followed by Al-Miqdad bin 
Al-Aswad. Akhram and ‘Abdur Rahman Al-Fazari met in combat. Akhram hamstrung 
‘Abdur Rahman’s horse but the latter managed to strike him with his lance and kill 
him. ‘Abdur Rahman turned around riding Akhram’s horse. Abu Qatadah, seeing this, 
got engaged in fierce combat with ‘Abdur Rahman, smote him with his lance and it 
was fatal. The polytheists consequently fled away and I was in their pursuit until 
before sunset they reached a valley with a spring of water called Dhu Qarad. They 
rested there to have a drink. I however, running in hot pursuit, turned them out of 
the valley before they could drink a drop of water. Later on, the Prophet [pbuh], 
along with his Companions, overtook me. I addressed him saying: Messenger of 
Allâh, let me select from our people one hundred men and I will follow the 
marauders and finish them. In reply, the Prophet [pbuh] said: "Ibn Al-Akwa‘, you 
have taken enough and so now you have to show magnanimity; now they have 
reached the habitation of Ghatfan where they are being feted." He added saying: 

232
"Our best horseman today is Abu Qatadah, and our best footman today is Salamah." 
He allotted me two shares of the booty - the share meant for the horseman and the 
other meant for the footman, and combined both of them for me. Intending to return 
to Madinah, he made me mount behind him on his she-camel called Al-‘Adba’