it was morning, the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] told them what ‘Iesa 
(Jesus) was in the light of the recently revealed verses. He left them a whole 
day to consult and think it over. So when it was next morning and they still 
showed disapproval to admit Allâh’s Words about ‘Isa or to embrace Islam, 
the Prophet suggested Al-Mubahala that is each party should supplicate and 
implore Allâh to send His Curse upon him or them if they were telling lies. 
After that suggestion of his, the Prophet [pbuh] came forward wrapping Al-
Hasan and Al-Husain under his garment whereas Fatimah was walking at his 
back. Seeing that the Prophet [pbuh] was serious and prepared to face them 
firmly, they went aside and started consulting. Al-‘Aqib and As-Saiyid (i.e. the 
Master) said to each other: "We shall not supplicate. For, I swear by Allâh, if 
he is really a Prophet and exchanges curses with us, we will never prosper 
nor will the descendants of ours. Consequently neither us nor our animals will 
survive it." Finally they made their mind to resort to the Messenger of Allâh’s 
judgement about their cause. They came to him and said: "We grant you 
what you have demanded." The Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] then admitted that 
agreement and ordered them to pay Al-Jizya (i.e. tribute) and he made peace 
with them for the provision of two thousand garments, one thousand of them 
to be delivered in Rajab, the other thousand ones in Safar. With every 
garment they had to pay an ounce (of gold). In return they will have the 
covenant of Allâh and His Messenger. He gave them a covenant that provides 
for practicing their religious affairs freely. They asked the Prophet [pbuh] to 
appoint a trustworthy man to receive the money agreed on for peace, so he 
sent them the trustworthy man of this nation Abu ‘Ubaidah bin Al-Jarrah to 
receive the amounts of money agreed on in the peace treaty. 
By the time Islam started to spread in Najran, naturally, they did not have to 
pay Al-Jizya that usually non-Muslims paid. Whatever the case was, it was 
said that Al-Aqib and As-Saiyid embraced Islam as soon as they reached 
Najran on their journey back home. It is also said that the Prophet [pbuh] 
sent to them ‘Ali too, for the co