am 1/142-147]

In brief, Abdul-Muttalib received an order in his dream to dig Zamzam well in 
a particular place. He did that and found the things that Jurhum men had 
buried therein when they were forced to evacuate Makkah. He found the 
swords, armours and the two deer of gold. The gate of Al-Ka‘bah was 
stamped from the gold swords and the two deer and then the tradition of 
providing Zamzam water to pilgrims was established.  

34
 
When the well of Zamzam gushed water forth, Quraish made a claim to 
partnership in the enterprise, but ‘Abdul-Muttalib refused their demands on 
grounds that All?  had singled only him out for this honourable job. To settle 
the dispute, they agreed to consult Bani Sa‘d’s diviner. On their way, All?
 
showed them His Signs that confirmed ‘Abdul-Muttalib’s prerogative as 
regards the sacred spring. Only then did ‘Abdul-Muttalib make a solemn vow 
to sacrifice one of his adult children to Al-Ka‘bah if he had ten.  
The second event was that of Abraha As-Sabah Al-Habashi, the Abyssinian 
(Ethiopian) viceroy in Yemen. He had seen that the Arabs made their 
pilgrimage to Al-Ka‘bah so he built a large church in San‘a in order to attract 
the Arab pilgrims to it to the exclusion of Makkah. A man from Kinana tribe 
understood this move, therefore he entered the church stealthily at night and 
besmeared its front wall with excrement. When Abraha knew of that, he got 
very angry and led a great army – of sixty thousand warriors – to demolish 
Al-Ka‘bah. He chose the biggest elephant for himself. His army included nine 
or thirteen elephants. He continued marching until he reached a place called 
Al-Magmas. There, he mobilized his army, prepared his elephants and got 
ready to enter Makkah. When he reached Muhassar Valley, between 
Muzdalifah and Mina, the elephant knelt down and refused to go forward. 
Whenever they directed it northwards, southwards or eastwards, the elephant 
moved quickly but when directed westwards towards Al-Ka‘bah, it knelt down. 
Meanwhile, All?  loosed upon them birds in flights, hurling against them 
stones of baked clay and made them like green blades devoured. These birds 
were very much like swallows and sparrows, each carrying three stones; one 
in its peak and two in its claws. The stones hit Abraha’s men and cut their 
limbs and killed them. A large number of Abraha’s soldiers were killed in this 
way and the others fled at random and died everywhere. Abraha himself had 
an infection that had his fingertips amputated. When he reached San‘a he was 
in a miserable state and died soon after.  
The Quraishites on their part had fled for their lives to the hillocks and 
mountain tops. When the enemy had been thus routed, they returned home 
safely. [Ibn Hisham 1/43-56; Tafheemul-Qur'an 6/462-469] 
The Event of the Elephant took place in the month of Al-Muharram, fifty or 
fifty five days before the birth of Prophet Muhammad [pbuh] which 
corresponded to late February or early March 571 A.D. It was a gift from All?
 
to His Prophet and his family. It could actually be regarded as a Divine 
auspicious precursor of the light to come and accompany the advent of the 
Prophet and his family. By contrast, Jerusalem had suffered under the yoke of 
the atrocities of Al