how or other, the news of these secret desert meetings with the Madinese 
leaked out. The Prophet immediately knew that it was a certain pudgy ugly devil, 
inhabited in Al-‘Aqabah, who discovered their meeting, and he threatened to settle 
his account with him as soon as possible. 
On hearing this, Al-‘Abbas bin Nadlah said "By Allâh, Who has sent you in Truth, we 
are powerful enough to put the people of Mina (the Quraishites) to our swords 
tomorrow, if you desire." The Prophet [pbuh] said "We have not been commanded to 
follow that course. Now, back to your camps." They went back to sleep till morning. 
[Ibn Hisham 1/448] 
No sooner did Quraish hear of this treaty than a kind of trouble-provoking tumult 
began to mushroom in all directions. They realized quite fully that an allegiance of 
this sort is bound to produce far-reaching ramifications of direct impact on their lives 
and wealth. The following day, a large delegation comprising the leaders and arch-
criminals of Makkah set out for the camp of the Madinese to protest severely against 
the treaty. They addressed the Madinese: "O people of Khazraj, it transpired to us 
that you have come here to conclude a treaty with this man (Muhammad) and 

98
evacuate him out of Makkah. By Allâh, we do really hold in abhorrence any sort of 
fight between you and us." [Ibn Hisham 1/448] 
The Madinese polytheists having known nothing about the secretly taken pledge, 
began to swear by Allâh and answered in good faith that there was no truth in the 
report. ‘Abdullah bin Ubai bin Salul, a Madinese polytheist, refuted their allegations 
denouncing them as null and void, claiming that his people would never initiate 
anything unless he gave them clear orders. 
The Madinese Muslims, however, remained silent neither negating nor confirming. 
The Quraishite leaders seemed to be almost convinced by the arguments presented 
by the polytheists, and went back home frustrated. However, they did not fully 
acquiesce in the words they heard. They began to scrutinize the smallest details, and 
trace the minutest news till it was established beyond a shadow of doubt that the 
pact did take place, but that was after the Madinese pilgrims had left Makkah. In a fit 
of rage, they pursued the pilgrims but did not succeed in catching hold of anyone 
except Sa‘d bin ‘Ubadah. They subjected him to unspeakable tortures, but he was 
later rescued by Al-Mut‘im bin ‘Adi and Harith bin Harb bin Omaiya with whom he 
had trade relations. [Za'd Al-Ma'ad 2/51,52; Ibn Hisham 1/448-450] 
That is the story of the Second ‘Aqabah Pledge, later known as the Great ‘Aqabah 
Pledge, effected in an atmosphere of love, allegiance and mutual support between 
Madinese believers and weak Makkan Muslims. This new spirit of affection, rapport 
and cooperation could never be attributable to a fleeing whim, on the contrary, it 
totally derived from an already deeply-established approach, viz. Belief in Allâh, His 
Messenger and His Book. It was a Belief so rooted in the selves that it managed to 
stand immune to all powers of injustice and aggression, and could be translated into 
miracles in the practical aspects of action and ideology pursuit. That sort of Belief 
was the real instrument for the Muslims to record in the annals of history 
unprecedented