marching steadily to annul 
their religious office and temporal authority. 
Abu Lahab himself took the initiative in the new series of persecutions, and started 
to mete out countless aspects of harmful deeds, hatred and spite against Muhammad 
[pbuh] . Starting with flinging stones at him, forcing his two sons to divorce their 
wives Ruqaiya and Umm Kulthum, the Prophet’s daughters [Fi Zilal Al-Qur'an 
30/282; Tafheem-ul-Qur'an 6/522], gloating over him on his second son’s death 
calling him ‘the man cut off with offspring’, and then shadowing his step during the 
pilgrimage and forums seasons to belie him and entice the bedouins against him and 
his Call [At-Tirmidhi]. His wife, Umm Jameel bint Harb, the sister of Abu Sufyan had 
also her share in this ruthless campaign. She proved that she was not less than her 
husband in the enmity and hatred she harboured for the Prophet [pbuh] . She used 
to tie bundles of thorns with ropes of twisted palm-leaf fibre and strew them about in 
the paths which the Prophet [pbuh] was expected to take, in order to cause him 
bodily injury. She was a real shrew, bad-tempered with abusive language, highly 
skilled in the art of hatching intrigues, and enkindling the fire of discord and sedition. 
She was deservedly stained as ‘the carrier of firewood’ in the Noble Qur’? . On 
receiving this news, she directly proceeded to the Mosque with a handful of pebbles 
to hurl at the Prophet [pbuh] . All? , the Great, took away her sight and she saw only 
Abu Bakr who was sitting immediately next to the Prophet [pbuh]. She then 
addressed Abu Bakr most audaciously threatening to break his Companion’s mouth 
with her handful of pebbles, and recited a line of verse pregnant with impudent 
defiance: "We have disobeyed the dispraised one, rejected his Call, and alienated 
ourselves from his religion." When she had left, Abu Bakr turned to the Prophet 

60
[pbuh] and inquired about the matter. The Prophet [pbuh] assured him that she did 
not see him because All?  had taken away her sight.[Ibn Hisham 1/335] 
Abu Lahab and his household used to inflict those shameful examples of torture and 
harassment in spite of the blood relation that tied them for he was the Prophet’s 
uncle and both lived in two contiguous houses. Actually, few of the Prophet’s 
neighbours abstained from maligning him. They even threw the entrails of a goat on 
his back while he was performing his prayers. He always used to complain about that 
unbecoming neighbourliness but to no avail for they were deeply indulged in error. 
Al-Bukhari, on the authority of Ibn Mas‘ud, narrated that once when the Prophet 
[pbuh] was prostrating himself while praying in Al-Ka‘bah, Abu Jahl asked his 
companions to bring the dirty foetus of a she-camel and place it on his back. ‘Uqbah 
bin Abi Mu‘ait was the unfortunate man who hastened to do this ignoble act. A peal 
of laughter rose amongst the infidels. In the meanwhile, Fatimah, the daughter of 
the Prophet [pbuh], happened to pass that way. She removed the filth from her 
father’s back. The Prophet [pbuh] invoked the wrath of All?  upon them, especially 
upon Abu Jahl, ‘Utbah bin Rabi‘a, Shaibah bin Rabi‘a, Al-Waleed bin ‘Utbah, Omaiyah 
bin Khalaf and ‘Uqb