of Najd 
With the peaceful victory that the Muslims achieved at Bani An-Nadeer invasion, 
their control over Madinah was undisputedly established, and the hypocrites receded 
to a state of silence and stopped their artful machinations publicly. Consequently the 
Prophet [pbuh] had ample time to direct all his energies and human resources 
towards suppressing the desert bedouins and curbing their harmful provocations and 
wicked malicious practices of killing his missionaries and even contemplating an 
invasion of Madinah itself. [Fiqh As-Seerah p.214] Meanwhile, the Muslim scouting 
groups reported building up of bedouin troops of Bani Muharib and Tha‘labah of 
Ghatfan around Madinah. The Prophet [pbuh], with the Muslims, hurriedly set out to 
discipline those new outlaws, cast fear into their hearts and deter them from 
perpetrating further wicked practices. These deterring operations were carried out 
repeatedly and did produce effective results. The rebellious hard-hearted desert 
bedouins were terrorized into the mountains, and Madinah remained completely 
immune against their raids. 
In the context of these invasions, it is interesting to draw some prominence to a 
significant one ¾ Dhat Ar-Riqa‘ (rags) campaign ¾ which some scholars claim, took 
place in Najd ( a large area of tableland in the Arabian Peninsula) in Rabi‘ Ath-Thani 
or Jumada Al-Ula, 4 A.H. They substantiate their claim by saying that it was 
strategically necessary to carry out this campaign in order to quell the rebellious 
bedouins in order to meet the exigencies of the agreed upon encounter with the 
polytheists, i.e. minor Badr Battle in Sha‘ban, 4 A.H. The most authentic opinion, 
however, is that Dhat Ar-Riqa‘ campaign took place after the fall of Khaibar. This is 
supported by the fact that Abu Hurairah and Abu Musa Al-Ash‘ari [R] witnessed the 
battle. Abu Hurairah embraced Islam only some days before Khaibar, and Abu Musa 
Al-Ash‘ari came back from Abyssinia (Ethiopia) and joined the Prophet [pbuh] at 
Khaibar. The rules relating to the prayer of fear which the Prophet [pbuh] observed 
at Dhat Ar-Riqa‘ campaign, were revealed at ‘Asfan Invasion and this beyond a 
shadow of doubt