efore long, Allâh again sent the Muslims a different sort of verses whereby teaching 
them ways of fighting, urging them to go to war and demonstrating relevant rules: 
"So, when you meet (in fight - Jihâd in Allâh’s cause), those who disbelieve 
smite at their necks till when you have killed and wounded many of them, 
then bind a bond firmly (on them, i.e. take them as captives). Thereafter (is 
the time) either for generosity (i.e. free them without ransom), or ransom 
(according to what benefits Islam), until the war lays down its burden. Thus 
[you are ordered by Allâh to continue in carrying out Jihâd against the 
disbelievers till they embrace Islam (i.e. are saved from the punishment in 
the Hell-fire) or at least come under your protection], but if it had been 
Allâh’s Will, He Himself could certainly have punished them (without you). 
But (He lets you fight), in order to test you, some with others. But those 
who are killed in the way of Allâh, He will never let their deeds be lost. He 
will guide them and set right their state. And admit them to Paradise which 
He has made known to them (i.e. they will know their places in Paradise 
more than they used to know their houses in the world). O you who believe! 
If you help (in the cause of) Allâh, He will help you, and make your foothold 
firm." [Al-Qur'an 47:4-7][Tafheem
-ul-Qur'an 5/11] 
Shortly afterwards, Allâh began to dispraise the hypocrites, the weak at heart and 
cowardly elements: 
"But when a decisive Sûrah (explaining and ordering things) is sent down, 
and fighting (Jihâd — the holy fighting) is mentioned (i.e. ordained) therein, 
you will see those in whose hearts is a disease (of hypocrisy) looking at you 
with a look of one fainting to death. " [Al-Qur'an 47:20] 
The prevalent exigencies required as a top priority exhorting the Muslims to fight. 
Any leader with a deep insight would order his soldiers to get ready for any sort of 
emergency, let alone the All-Knowing Exalted Lord, Who is at all times omniscient of 
the minutest details of affairs. The event of that skirmish with the polytheists dealt a 
heavy blow to the pride of Quraish and created a sort of horrible restlessness 
amongst them. 
The aforementioned Qur’ânic verses, enjoining the Muslims to strive in the cause of 
Allâh, betrayed the proximity of blood clashes that would be crowned by a decisive 
victory for the Muslims, and final expulsion of polytheists out of the Sacred City, 
Makkah. They referred to rules pertinent to the treatment of captives and 
slaughtering the pagan soldiers till the war ended and laid down its burdens. All of 
these could act as clues to a final triumph that would envelop the strife of the 
Muslims towards their noble objectives. 
Another event of great significance featured the same month Sha‘ban 2 A.H., i.e. 
February 624 A.D., which was a Divine injunction ordering that Al-Qiblah be changed 
from Jerusalem to the Sacred Mosque in Makkah. That was of a great advantage to 
the Muslims at two levels. First, it brought about a kind of social sifting, so to speak, 
in terms of the hypocrites of the Jews and others weak at heart, and revealed their 
true nature and inclinations; the ranks of the Muslims were thereby purged from 
those discord-prone elements. Second, facing a new Qiblah, the Sacred Mosque in 
Makkah, refers gently to a new role awaiting the Muslims to take up, and would start 

131
only after the repatriation of the Muslims to their Sacred City, Makkah for it is not 
logical for the Muslims to leave their Qiblah at the mercy of non-Muslims. 
The Muslims, therefore, at the behest of Allâh and on account of those Divine clues, 
augmented their activities and their tendency towards striving in the cause of Allâh 
and encountering His enemies in a decisive battle were greatly intensified.                     

132
The Battle of Badr 
The First Decisive Battle in the History of Islam 
Reason of the Battle 
We have already spoken about Al-‘Ushairah Invasion when a caravan belonging to 
Quraish had escaped an imminent military encounter with the Prophet [pbuh] and his 
men. When their return from Syria approached, the Prophet [pbuh] despatched 
Talhah bin ‘Ubaidullâh and Sa‘id bin Zaid northward to scout around for any 
movements of this sort. The two scouts stayed at Al-Hawra’ for some days until Abu 
Sufyan, the leader of the caravan, passed by them. The two men hurried back to 
Madinah and reported to the Prophet [pbuh] their findings. Great wealth amounting 
to 50 thousand gold Dinars guarded by 40 men moving relatively close to Madinah 
constituted a tempting target for the Muslim military, and provided a potentially 
heavy economic, political and military strike that was bound to shake the entire 
structure of the Makkan polytheists. 
The Prophet [pbuh] immediately exhorted the Muslims to rush out and waylay the 
caravan to make up for their property and wealth they were forced to give up in 
Makkah. He did not give orders binding to everyone, but rather gave them full liberty 
to go out or stay back, thinking that it would be just an errand on a small scale. 
The Muslim army was made up of 300-317 men, 82-86 Emigrants, 61 from Aws and 
170 from Khazraj. They were not well-equipped nor adequately prepared. They had 
only two horses belonging to Az-Zubair bin Al-‘Awwam and Al-Miqdad bin Al-Aswad 
Al-Kindi, 70 camels, one for two or three men to ride alternatively. The Messenger of 
Allâh [pbuh] himself, ‘Ali and Murthid bin Abi Murthid Al-Ghanawi had only one 
camel. Disposition of the affairs of Madinah was entrusted to Ibn Umm Maktum but 
later to Abu Lubabah bin ‘Abdul Mundhir. The general leadership was given to Mus‘ab 
bin ‘Umair Al-Qurashi Al-‘Abdari, and their standard was white in colour. The little 
army was divided into two battalions, the Emigrants with a standard raised by ‘Ali 
bin Abi Talib, and the Helpers whose standard was in the hand of Sa‘d bin Mu‘adh. 
Az-Zubair bin Al-‘Awwam was appointed to the leadership of the right flank, Al-
Miqdad bin ‘Amr to lead the left flank, and the rear of the army was at the command 
of Qais bin Abi