patiently awaiting ‘Umair’s news but to his great surprise, he was told that the 
man had embraced Islam and changed into a devoted believer. ‘Umair later came 
back to Makkah where he started to call people unto Islam and he did actually 
manage to convert a lot of Makkans into Islam.[Ibn Hisham 1/661-663]  
Invasion of Bani Qainuqa‘ 
We have already spoken about the treaty that the Prophet [pbuh] signed with the 
Jews. He was very careful to abide by it to the letter and the Muslims did not show 
the least violation of any of its provisions. The Jews, however, whose natural 
disposition is closely linked to treachery, betrayal and covenant-breaching, could not 
rid themselves of the tradition of theirs, and started a process of intrigues and 
troublemaking with the aim of producing schism in the growing solid Muslim ranks. 
Here is a relevant model of their behaviour: Shas bin Qais, an elderly Jew, a terrible 
disbeliever and a greatly envious man of the Muslims, passed by a group of 

149
Muhammad [pbuh]’s followers of Aws and Khazraj. He perceived a prevalent spirit of 
reconciliation and an atmosphere of rapport and amity enveloping the whole group; 
an unusual scene categorically in conflict with the animosity and hatred that 
characterized their pre-Islam behaviour. He, therefore, sent a youth of his to sit 
among them, remind them of Bu‘ath war between them and recite some of their 
verses which they used to compose satirizing each other; all of this with the 
intention of sowing the seeds of discord and disagreement and undermining the new 
Islamically-orientated inter-tribal relations. The youth did in fact succeed and the two 
parties at no time recalled the old days and pre-Islam tribal fanaticism sprang to the 
front to bring about a state of war. 
The Prophet [pbuh] was reported of this account, and immediately, at the head of 
some Emigrants, set out to see to the situation. He began to rebuke them but in the 
manner of the great instructor and the tolerant spirit of the understanding guide: "O, 
Muslims! Do you still advance pre-Islamic arguments after I have been sent to you 
(as a Messenger). Remember that it is not rightful for you to turn backward after 
Allâh has guided you to the Straight Path, delivered you from disbelief and created 
amity between you." The Muslims readily realized that it was a Satanic whim and a 
plot hatched by the enemies. They directly embraced each other and went back 
home quite satisfied and in full obedience to the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh].[Ibn Hisham 
1/555, 556] 
Such were the practices of the Jews, trouble-making, dissension-sowing, falsehood-
fabrication, faking belief in the day, and practising disbelief at night. In everyday life, 
they used to tighten the ropes of financial dealings on the Muslims. If they happened 
to owe a Muslim something, they would shirk their obligations on grounds that he 
had converted into a new religion and they would allege the basis of agreement was 
no longer valid. If it was the other way, they would never cease to harass him day 
and night to pay back the debt, all of which in a desperate attempt to demolish the 
great edifice of the new religion that was rapidly gaining ground and speedily 
towering up skyward.  
The Qainuqa‘ Jews breach the Covenant 
Seeing that Allâh sided with the believers and granted them a manifest victory and 
perceiving the Muslims’ awesome presence in Madinah, the Jews could no longer 
contain themselves or conceal indignation. They started a series of provocative and 
harmful deeds publicly. The most wicked amongst them were the tribe of Banu 
Qainuqa‘, who lived in quarters within Madinah named after them. As for jobs, they 
took up goldsmithery, blacksmithing and crafts of making household instruments, 
that is why war weaponry was available in large quantities in their houses. They 
counted 700 warriors, and were the most daring amongst the Jewish community in 
Arabia, and now the first to breach the covenant of cooperation and non-aggression 
which they had already countersigned with the Prophet [pbuh]. Their behaviour grew 
too impolite and unbearable. They started a process of trouble-making, jeering at 
the Muslims, hurting those who frequented their bazaars, and even intimidating their 
women. Such things began to aggravate the general situation, so the Prophet [pbuh] 
gathered them in assemblage, admonished and called them to be rational, sensible 
and guided and cautioned against further transgression. Nevertheless they remained 
obdurate and paid no heed to his warning, and said: "Don’t be deluded on account of 
defeating some Quraishites inexperienced in the art of war. If you were to engage us 
in fight, you will realize that we are genuine war experts." 

150
In this regard, the Words of Allâh were revealed saying: 
"Say (O Muhammad [pbuh] ) to those who disbelieve: ‘You will be defeated 
and gathered together to Hell, and worst indeed is that place to rest.’ There 
has already been a Sign for you (O Jews) in the two armies that met (in 
combat — i.e. the battle of Badr): One was fighting in the cause of Allâh, and 
as for the other (they) were disbelievers. They (the believers) saw them 
(the disbelievers) with their own eyes twice their number (although they 
were thrice their number). And Allâh supports with His Victory whom He 
pleases. Verily, in this is a lesson for those who understand." [Al-Qur'an 
3:12,13] [Sunan Abu Da'ud with Aunul-Ma'bood 3/115; Ibn Hisham 1/552] 
The answer of Banu Qainuqa‘ amounted, as seen, to war declaration. The Prophet 
[pbuh] suppressed his anger and advised the Muslims to be patient and forbearing 
and wait for what time might reveal. 
The Jews, went too far in their transgression, presumptuous behaviour and licentious 
practices. One day a Jewish goldsmith provoked a Muslim woman whose genitals 
become uncovered when he had tied the edge of the garment to her back. A Muslim 
man happened to be there and killed the man; the Jews retaliated by killing that 
Muslim. The man’s family called the Muslims for help and war started.[Ibn Hisham 2/47,48] 
On Saturday, Shawwal 15th, 2 A.H., the Prophet [pbuh] marched out with his 
soldiers, Hamzah bin ‘Abdul Muttalib, carrying the standard of the Muslims and laid 
siege to the Jews’ forts for 15 days. Allâh cast fear into their hearts, and they were 
obliged to defer to the Messenger[pbuh]’s judgement on their lives, wealth, women 
and children; their hands were tied behind their backs. 
At this po