repeated the Prophet’s [pbuh]statements loudly at ‘Arafat was Rabi‘a 
bin Omaiyah bin Khalaf. [Ibn Hisham 2/605] 
As soon as the Prophet [pbuh] had accomplished delivering the speech, the following 
Qur’ânic verse was revealed to him: 
"This day I have perfected your religion for you, completed My Favour upon 
you, and have chosen for you Islam as your religion." [Al-Qur'an 5:3] 
Upon hearing this verse ‘Umar cried. "What makes you cry?" He was asked. His 
answer was: "Nothing succeeds perfection but imperfection." [Rahmat-ul-lil'alameen 1/265] 
Bilal called for prayer after the speech, and then made the second call. The Prophet 
[pbuh] performed both of the noon and the afternoon prayers separately, with no 
prayers in between. He then mounted his she-camel Al-Qaswa’, approached the 
location of the vigil, directed his face towards Al-Qiblah, kept on standing till sunset 
when the sky yellow colour vanished a bit and the disc of the sun disappeared. 
Osamah added that the Prophet [pbuh]moved onward to Muzdalifa. where he 
observed the sunset and the evening prayers with one ‘First call’ and two ‘second 
calls’. He did not entertain the Glory of Allâh between the two prayers. Then he lay 
down till it was dawn prayer time. He performed it with one first call and one second 
call at almost daybreak time. Mounting on his Al-Qaswa’, he moved towards Al-
Mash‘ar Al-Haram. He faced Al-Qiblah and started supplicating: "Allâh is the 
Greatest. There is no god but Allâh." He remained there till it was clear morning and 
before the sun rose high, he made his way to Mina. He walked a little and threaded 
the mid-road leading to the big Jamrah where he stopped and pelted seven pebbles 
at it saying "Allâh is the Greatest" each time. They were like small pebbles hurled 
from the bottom of the valley. Then he set off to the sacrificial place, where he 
sacrificed sixty-three camels with his hands, and asked ‘Ali to slaughter the others, a 
hundred and thirty-seven altogether. He made ‘Ali share him in Al-Hadi. A piece of 
meat from each slaughtered animal was ordered to be cooked in a pot and from 
which both men ate, and drank the soup. 
Then the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] mounted his she-camel and returned to the 
House where he observed the noon prayer at Makkah and there he came upon the 
children of ‘Abdul Muttalib were supplying drinking water to people at Zamzam Well. 
"Draw up water, children of ‘Abdul Muttalib, I would draw up with you if I were not 
afraid that people would appropriate this honour after me." They handed him a pail 
of water and he drank to his fill. [Sahih Muslim 1/397-400] 

301
At the daytime of the tenth of Dhul-Hijjah on the Slaughtering Day (Yaum An-Nahr) 
The Prophet [pbuh] delivered another speech. That was at high time morning, while 
he was mounting a grey mule. ‘Ali conveyed his statements to the people, who were 
standing or sitting. [Abu Da'ud 1/270] He repeated some of the statements that he 
had previously said the day before. The two Sheikh (Bukhâri and Muslim) reported a 
version narrated by Abi Bakrah who said: 
The Prophet [pbuh] made a speech on Yaum An-Nahr (day of slaughtering) and said: 
"Time has grown similar in form and state to the time when Allâh created 
the heavens and the earth. A year is twelve months. Four of which are 
Sacred Months (Hurum). Three of the four months are successive. They are 
Dhul-Qa‘dah, Dhul-Hijjah, and Al-Muharram. The fourth Month is Rajab 
Mudar, which comes between Jumada and Sha‘ban." 
"What month is this month?" He asked. We said: "Allâh and His Messenger 
know best of all." He kept silent for a while till we thought he would attach 
to it a different appellation. "Is it not Dhul-Hijjah?" He wondered. "Yes. It 
is." We said. Then he asked, "What is this town called?" We said: "Allâh and 
His Messenger know best of all." He was silent for a while till we thought he 
would give it a different name. "Is it not Al-Baldah? (i.e. the town)" asked 
he. "Yes. It is." We replied. Then he asked again, "What day is it today?" We 
replied: "Allâh and His Messenger know best of all." Then he kept silent for 
a while and said wondering: "Is it not ‘An-Nahr’ (i.e. slaughtering) Day?" 
"Yes. It is." Said we. Then he said:  
"(Shedding) the blood of one another and eating or taking one another’s 
provisions (unwillingly) and your honour are all inviolable (Haram). It is 
unlawful to violate their holiness. They must be as sacred to one another as 
this sacred day, in this sacred month, in this sacred town." 
"You will go back to be resurrected (after death) to your Lord. There you 
will be accounted for your deeds. So do not turn into people who go astray 
and kill one another." 
"Have I not delivered the Message (of my Lord)?" "Yes you have." Said 
they. "O Allâh! Bear witness! Let him that is present convey it unto him who 
is absent. For haply, many people to whom the Message is conveyed may be 
more mindful of it than the audience,." said he. [Sahih Al-Bukhari 1/234] 
In another version it is said that the Prophet [pbuh] had said in that very speech:  
"He whoever plunges into misfortune will certainly aggrieve himself. So let 
no one of you inflict an evil upon his parents. Verily Satan has utterly 
despaired being worshipped in this country of yours; but he will be obeyed 
at your committing trivial things you disdain. Satan will be contented with 
such things." [At-Tirmidhi 2/38, 135; Mishkat Al-Masabih 1/234] 

302
The Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] spent At-Tashreeq Days (11th, 12th and 13th of 
Dhul-Hijjah) in Mina performing the ritual teachings of Islam, remembering Allâh 
(praying), following the ways of guidance of Ibrahim, wiping out all traces and 
features or polytheism. On some days of At-Tashreeq he delivered some speeches as 
well. In a version to Abu Da’ûd with good reference to Sira,’ the daughter of Nabhan; 
she said: "The Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] made us a speech at the Ru’us (Heads) 
Day in which he said: "Is it not this the middle day of At-Tashreeq Days." [Abu Da'ud 
1/269] 
His speech that day was similar to that of An-Nahr Day’s. It was made after the 
revelation of Surat An-Nasr. 
On the second day of An-Nafr (i.e. Departure) — on the thirteenth of Dhul-Hijjah, the 
Prophet [pbuh] proceeded with An-Nafr to Mina and stayed at a high place of a 
mountain side at Bani Kinanah from Al-Abtah. He spent the rest of that day and 
night there — where he performed the noon, the afternoon, the sunset and the 
evening prayers. 
Then he slept for a short while and mounted leaving for the Ka‘bah. He performed 
the Farewell Circumambulation (Tawaf Al-Wada‘), after ordering his Companions to 
do the same thing. 
Upon the accomplishment of his religious rituals he quickened his move to the 
purified Madinah. He went there not to seek rest but to resume the strife and 
struggle in the way of Allâh. [Sahih Al-