t the expedition of Dhat-ur-Riqa‘ had a tremendous impact on all the 
Arabians. It cast fear into their hearts and rendered them too powerless to 
antagonize the Muslim society in Madinah. They began to acquiesce in the prevailing 
situation and resigned themselves to new geo-political conditions working in favour 
of the new religion. Some of them even embraced Islam and took an active part in 
the conquest of Makkah and the battle of Hunain, and received their due shares of 
the war booty. 
From that time onward, the anti-Islam tripartite coalition had been subdued, and 
peace and security prevailed. The Muslims, then started to redress any political 
imbalance and fill in the small gaps that still triggered unrest here and there in the 
face of the great drive of Islamization that enveloped the whole area. We could in 
this context mention some of these incidental skirmishes which pointed markedly to 
the ever-growing power of the Muslim society. 
1. A platoon headed by Ghalib bin ‘Abdullah Al-Laithi in Safar or in Rabi‘ Al-
Awwal 7 A.H. was despatched to muffle the provocative behaviour of Bani Al-
Muluh. The Muslims managed to kill a large number of the enemy soldiers and 
captured a great deal of booty. A large army of polytheists rushed in their 
heel but floods hindered the pursuit, and the Muslims managed to withdraw in 
safety. 
2. ‘Umar bin Al-Khattab, at the head of a 30-soldier group, set out to a spot 
called Turbah in Sha‘ban 7 A.H. to discipline the people of Hawazin. He no 
longer arrived at their habitation that they fled for their lives. 
3. Thirty men with Basheer bin Sa‘d Al-Ansari headed for Bani Murrah in Sha‘ban 
7 A.H. in Fadak area. He killed a large number of the enemy and seized a lot 
of their camels and cattle. On his way back, the enemy gathered up forces 
and overtook the Muslims at night. They showered Basheer and his men with 
arrows, and killed all the Muslims except Basheer, who took refuge in Fadak 
and stayed with the Jews there until his wounds healed. 
4. Ghalib bin ‘Abdullah Al-Laithi at the head of a platoon of 130 men launched an 
attack against Bani ‘Awâl and Bani ‘Abd bin Tha‘lbah in Ramadan 7 A.H. They 
killed some of the enemy’s men and captured their cattle and camels. ‘Usama 
bin Zaid killed Mardas bin Nahik, a polytheist, but after he had pronounced 
the testimony of Allâh’s Oneness to which incident the Prophet [pbuh] 
commented addressing his Companions: "Would you rip open his heart to 
discern whether he is truthful or a liar?" 
5. A thirty-horseman group headed by ‘Abdullah bin Rawaha marched towards 
Khaibar on reports that Aseer (or Basheer bin Razam) was rallying the ranks 
of Bani Ghatfan to attack the Muslims: They managed to persuade that Jew to 
follow them to Madinah encouraging him that the Prophet [pbuh] would 
institute him as a ruler of Khaibar. On their way back there occurred a sort of 
misunderstanding that gave rise to fierce fighting between the two parties 
resulting in the death of Aseer and the thirty men with him. 
6. In Shawwal 7 A.H., Basheer bin Sa‘d Al-Ansari marched towards Yemen and 
Jabar at the head of 300 Muslim fighters to subdue a large mob of polytheists 

242
who gathered to raid the outskirts of Madinah. Basheer and his men used to 
march at night and lurk during the day until they reached their destination. 
Having heard about the advent of the Muslims, the polytheists fled away 
leaving behind them a large booty and two men who later embraced Islam on 
arrival in Madinah. 
7. In the year 7 A.H., shortly before the Compensatory ‘Umrah (lesser 
pilgrimage), a man called Jashm bin Mu‘awiyah came to a spot called Ghabah 
where he wanted to gather the people of Qais and entice them into fighting 
the Muslims. The Prophet [pbuh], on hearing these reports, despatched Abu 
Hadrad with two men to see to the situation. Abu Hadrad, through a clever 
strategy, managed to rout the enemy and capture a lot of their cattle. [Za'd Al-
Ma'ad 2/149, 150; Rahmat-ul-lil'alameen 2/229, 230; Mukhtasar Seerat Ar-Rasool p.322-324]                   

243
The Compensatory ‘Umrah 
(Lesser Pilgrimage) 
When Dhul Qa‘da month approached towards the close of the seventh year A.H., the 
Prophet [pbuh] ordered his people, and the men who witnessed Al-Hudaibiyah Truce 
Treaty in particular, to make preparations to perform ‘Umrah (lesser pilgrimage). He 
proceeded with 2000 men besides some women and children [Fath Al-Bari 7/700], 
and 60 camels for sacrifice, to visit the Holy Sanctuary in Makkah. The Muslims took 
their weapons with them fearing the treachery of the Quraishites, but left them with 
a party of two hundred men at a place some eight miles from Makkah. They entered 
the city with the swords in their scabbards [Za'd Al-Ma'ad 2/151; Fath Al-Bari 
7/700], with the Prophet [pbuh] at their head on his she-camel, Al-Qaswa’, while the 
surrounding Companions attentively focusing their look on him, all saying: "Here I 
am! at Your service O Allâh!" The Quraishites had left the place and retired to their 
tents on the adjoining hills. The Muslims performed the usual circumambulation 
vigorously and briskly; and on recommendation by the Prophet [pbuh] they did their 
best to appear strong and steadfast in their circumambulation as the polytheists had 
spread rumours that they were weak because the fever of Yathrib (Madinah) had 
sapped their strength. They were ordered to run in the first three rounds and then 
walk in the remaining ones. The Makkans meanwhile aligned on the top of Qu‘aiqa‘an 
Mount watching the Muslims, tongue-tied at witnessing their strength and devotion. 
When they entered the Holy Sanctuary, ‘Abdullah bin Rawaha walked before the 
Prophet [pbuh] reciting: 
"Get out of his way, you disbelievers, make way, we will fight you about its 
revelation with strokes that will remove heads from shoulders and make friend 
unmindful of friend." 
After ritual walking and running between the two hills of Makkah, Safa and Marwah, 
the Prophet[pbuh] with the Muslims halted at the latter spot to slaughter the 
sacrificial animals and shave their heads. 
The main body of the pilgrims had now performed the basic rites of the lesser 
pilgrimage, but there remained those who were entrusted the charge of the 
weapons. The Prophet had these relieved, and they went through the same 
devotions as the others did. 
On the morning of the fourth day of the pilgrimage, the notables of Quraish asked 
‘Ali bin Abi Talib to tell the Prophet [pbuh] to leave Makkah along with his 
Companions. He, of course, could not conceive of violating the terms of Al-
Hudaibiyah Treaty, therefore he ordered his men to depart for a village called Sarif 
where he stayed for some time. 
It was during this visit of the Prophet [pbuh] to Makkah for pilgrimage that his uncle 
‘Abbas offered the hand of his sister-in-law, Maimuna — the daughter of Harith, to 
him. The Prophet [pbuh] was kind enough to accept this offer since it was an 
effective step towards cementing the ties of relationship between the Prophet [pbuh] 
and the influential men of Makkah. The wedding took place in Sarif. [Za'd Al-Ma'ad 2/152] 

244
Narrators attached different designations to this lesser pilgrimage. Some called it the 
compensatory lesser pilgrimage, performed instead of that uncompleted of 
Hudaibiyah; and the other one, given preponderance by jurists, is the lesser 
pilgrimage consequent on certain terms of a treaty already agreed upon. 
On the whole, compensatory, judicial consent, retribution and reconciliation are all 
terms applicable to that visit. 
Some military operations, directed against some still obdurate desert Arabians, took 
place at the conclusion of the lesser pilgrimage, of which we could mention: 
1. A platoon of 50 men led by Ibn Abi Al-‘Awja’ was despatched by the Prophet 
[pbuh] to the habitations of Bani Saleem inviting them to embrace Islam, but 
all the words fell on deaf ears. Fierce fighting erupted between both parties 
during which the Muslim leader was wounded, and two of the enemy were 
captured. 
2. Ghalib bin ‘Abdullah at the head of 200 men was despatched to Fadak where 
they killed some rebels and a lot of booty fell to their lot. 
3. Banu Quda‘a had gathered a large number of men to raid the Muslim 
positions. On hearing the news, the Prophet [pbuh] despatched Ka‘b bin 
‘Umair Al-Ansari at the head of 15 men to deal with this situation. They 
encountered the army, and called them to enter into the fold of Islam but the 
rebels gave a negative response and showered the Muslims with arrows killing 
all of them except one who was carried back home later seriously wounded. 
[Rahmat-ul-lil'alameen 2/231]  
There was also an insignificant skirmish that occurred in Rabi‘ Al-Awwal 8 A.H. Shuja‘ 
bi