urs. On the way they distributed 
the spoils and put aside the best things to the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh]. 
They did not share the Hatims. 
Upon arrival in Madinah, the sister of ‘Adi bin Hatim begged the Messenger of 
Allâh [pbuh] to have mercy on her and said: "O Messenger of Allâh, my 
brother is absent and father is dead, and I am too old to render any service. 
Be beneficent to me so that Allâh may be bountiful to you." He said: "Who is 
your brother?" She said: "It is ‘Adi bin Hatim." "Is he not the one who fled 
from Allâh and his Messenger?" Said the Prophet [pbuh] then went away from 
her. Next day she reiterated the same thing as the day before and received 
the same answer. A day later she uttered similar words, this time he made 
benefaction to her. The man who was beside the Prophet, and whom she 
thought to be ‘Ali, said to her: "Ask for an animal from him to ride on." And 
she was granted her request. 
She returned to Ash-Sham where she met her brother and said to him: "The 
Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] has done me such noble deed that your father 
would never have done it. Therefore, willy-nilly, frightened or secure, you 
should go and see him." Unsecure neither protected by some one, not even 
recommended by a letter as a means of protection, ‘Adi came and met the 
Prophet. The Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] took him home with him. As soon as 
he sat before him, the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] thanked Allâh and praised 
him, then said: "What makes you flee? Do you flee lest you should say there 
is no god but Allâh? Do you know any other god but Allâh?" "No" he said, 
then talked for a while. The Messenger of Allâh went on saying: "Certainly 
you flee so that you may not hear the statement saying ‘Allâh is the 
Greatest.’ Do you know anyone who is greater than Allâh?" "No" he said. "The 
Jews are those whose portion is wrath, and the Christians are those who have 
gone astray," the Prophet retorted. "I am a Muslim and I believe in one God 
(Allâh)." ‘Adi finally proclaimed with a joyous face. The Prophet ordered him a 
residence with one of the Helpers. From that time he started calling at the 
Prophet [pbuh] in the mornings and in the evenings. [Za'd Al-Ma'ad 2/205] 
On the authority of Ibn Ishaq, when the Prophet [pbuh] made him sit down in 
front of him in his house, the Prophet said, "O ‘Adi, were you not cast in 
disbelief?" "Yes". ‘Adi said. "Did you not share one quarter of your people’s 
gains?" "Yes". Said ‘Adi. The Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] said: "It is sinful in 
your religion to do such a thing, and you should not allow yourself to do it." 
"Yes, by Allâh, that is true", said ‘Adi. "Thus I worked out that he was a 
Prophet inspired by Allâh, and sent to people. He knows what is unknown." [Ibn 
Hisham 2/581] 
In another version, the Prophet [pbuh] said: "‘Adi, embrace Islam and you 
shall be secure." "But I am a man of religion." Said ‘Adi. "I know your religion 
better than you." Said the Prophet. "Do you know my religion better than 
me?" ‘Adi asked. The Prophet replied, "Yes". He said: "Are you not cast in 
disbelief because you appropriate to yourself the fourth of your people’s 
gains?" "Yes". Said ‘Adi. "It is unlawful in your religion to do such a thing." 
The Prophet said, and ‘‘Adi added: "He did not need to say it again for I 
immediately acquiesced it." [Musnad Imam Ahmad] 

271
Al-Bukhari narrates that ‘Adi said: While we were with the Prophet [pbuh], a man 
came in and complained to him about poverty. Then another man came in and 
complained about highway robbery. The Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] then said: "O 
‘Adi, have you ever been to Al-Hirah? If you were doomed to live long life, you would 
be able to see a riding camel woman travel from Hirah till it circumambulates Al-
Ka‘bah fearing none but Allâh; and if you were to live long enough you would open 
the treasures of Kisra. And if you were to live long you would be able to see man 
offering a handful of gold or silver to others but none accepts to take it." At the end 
of this Hadith ‘Adi later on says: "I have seen a riding camel woman travel from Al-
Hirah till it circumambulates the Ka‘bah fearing none but Allâh, I have also been one 
of those who opened the treasures of Kisra bin Hurmuz. If you were to live long life 
you would witness what the Prophet, Abul Qasim, [pbuh] had already said about 
‘of