e Last Expeditions 
The pride of the Byzantine State made it deny Muslims their right to live. The 
Byzantine arrogance made them even kill those agents of theirs, who embraced 
Islam. Killing Farwah bin ‘Amr Al-Judhami, who was their agent on Mu’an, was an 
evidence of their arrogance. Due to that arrogance and presumptuousness of the 
Byzantines, the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] started to mobilize a great army in Safar 
in the eleventh year of Al-Hijra and made it under the command of Osamah bin Zaid 
bin Haritha with orders to have the horses of Muslims tread on the lands bordering 
Al-Balqa’ and Ad-Darum of Palestine. His aim was to terrorize Byzantines and to 
implant confidence into the hearts of Arabs who were settled at the borders of the 
Byzantines. His other purpose was to deliver a message to everybody there, so that 
no one may dare say that the Church brutality can’t go with impunity; and that 
Islamization is not synonymous with fear and vulnerability. 
The leadership of Osamah was subject to criticism. Because he was still too young, 
people tarried at joining his expedition. The Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] addressed 
people saying:  
"No wonder now you contest his leadership, for you have already contested 
the ex-leadership of his father. Yes, by Allâh, his father, who was one of the 
most beloved people to me, was quite efficient for leadership; and this son 
of his is one of the most beloved individuals to me after his father." [Sahih Al-
Bukhari 2/612] 
So people started tending towards Osamah and joined his army. The number of 
volunteers in his army was so enormous that they formed such a long queue that 
they had to descend the escarpment — which was a parasang off Madinah. The 
anxiety-provoking news about the Messenger of Allâh’s sickness, however, made the 
expedition tarry again in order to know what Allâh had willed as regards His 
Messenger [pbuh]. 
It was Allâh’s Will that Osamah’s expedition would be the first one dispatched during 
the caliphat