aign is in fact an extension of Hunain Ghazwah; that is because the 
majority of the defeated troops of Hawazin and Thaqif went into Ta’if with the 
general commander — Malik bin ‘Awf An-Nasri — and fortified themselves within it. 
So upon finishing with Hunain Invasion, he gathered the booty at Al-Ji‘ranah in the 
very month (i.e. Shawwal) and in the eighth year A.H. 
A vanguard battalion of a thousand men led by Khalid bin Al-Waleed marched 
towards At-Ta’if. Whereas the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] proceeded passing through 
Nakhlah Al-Yamaniyah, Qarn Al-Manazil and through Laiyah. At Laiyah there was a 
castle that belonged to Malik bin ‘Awf, so the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] gave orders 
to have it destroyed. He resumed his march till he got to Ta’if. There he dismounted, 
camped near its castle and laid siege to the castle inhabitants; but not for long. 
How long the siege continued, is still a matter of disagreement. It however stands 
between 10-20 days. [Sahih Muslim, narrated by Anas [AWS]; Fath Al-Bari 8/45] 
A lot of arrow-shooting and rock-hurling occurred during the siege. For as soon as 
the Muslims laid siege round the castle, its people started shooting arrows against 
them. The arrows were so intense and fierce that they looked as if they had been 
locusts on the move. A number of Muslims were wounded and twelve were killed. 
To be far from the arrow-range, the Muslims had to ascend to a higher location and 
camped on — i.e. to what is now called At-Ta’if Mosque. The Prophet [pbuh] set up a 
mangonel and shelled the castle. Eventually a gap was made in the castle wall, 
through which a number of Muslims managed to pass into the castle, sheltered by a 
wooden tank, with the purpose of setting fire into it. Anyway, the enemy poured 

263
down molten hot iron on them. Affected by this the Muslims stepped out of the tank 
and were again exposed to arrow shooting and consequently some of them were 
killed. 
To force the enemy to surrender, the Prophet [pbuh] tended to a war policy of 
burning and cutting the enemy’s crops. His order was to cut their vineyards and burn 
them. Seeing that the Muslims started rapidly cutting and burning their vines, they 
implored the Prophet [pbuh] to stop and have mercy on them for the sake of Allâh 
and out of kinship motives. So the Prophet agreed. When the caller of the Messenger 
of Allâh [pbuh] called out unto people saying "He whosoever descends and steps out 
of the castle is free." Twenty-three men came out. [Sahih Al-Bukhari 2/620] One of 
them was Abu Bakrah who tied himself to a wall and let himself down by means of a 
small wheel, that would normally be used for drawing up water from a well. The way 
he let himself down made the Prophet nickname him "Abu Bakrah", i.e. the man with 
the wheel. The Messenger of Allâh Õáì Çááå