ledge 
The next year, thirteenth of Prophethood, June 622 A.D., during the pilgrimage 
season, over seventy converts from Madinah came in the trail of their polytheist 
people to perform the rituals of pilgrimage in Makkah. The oft-repeated question 
amongst them was "Isn’t it high time we protect Muhammad instead of leaving him 
forsaken, deserted and stumbling in the hillocks of Makkah?" 
Shortly after arrival, they conducted clandestine contacts with the Prophet [pbuh] 
and agreed to meet him secretly at night in mid Tashreeq Days (the 11th, 12th and 
13th days of Dhul Hijja) in a hillock at Al-‘Aqabah, the last year’s meeting place. 
One of the leaders of the Ansâr (Helpers), Ka‘b bin Malik Al-Ansari, gave an account 
of the historic meeting which changed the whole course of the struggle between 
Islam and paganism, he said: 
We set out for pilgrimage and struck a rendezvous in mid Tashreeq Days. We were 
accompanied by a celebrity and a notable of ours called ‘Abdullah bin ‘Amr bin 
Haram, who was still a polytheist. We disclosed to him our intention of meeting 
Muhammad [pbuh] and exhorted him to join our ranks and give up polytheism lest 
he should serve as wood for Hell in the Hereafter. He promptly embraced Islam and 
witnessed the serious meeting at Al-‘Aqabah. 
That very night we slept with our people in our camps. After a third of the night had 
elapsed, we began to leave stealthily and met in a hillock nearby. We were seventy 
three men and two women Nusaibah bint Ka‘b from the Najjars and Asma’ bint ‘Amr 
from Bani Salamah. We waited for the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] until he came in 
the company of his uncle Al-‘Abbas bin ‘Abdul Muttalib who (though himself not a 
Muslim), adjured us not to draw his nephew away from the protection of his own 
kindred unless we were fully prepared to defend him even at the risk of our lives. He 
was the first to speak: 
"O you people of the Khazraj — the Arabs used to call the Ansâr (Helpers) 
Khazraj, whether from Khazraj or Aws — you all know the position that 
Muhammad holds among us. We have protected him from our people as 
much as we could. He is honoured and respected among his people. He 
refuses to join any party except you. So if you think you can carry out what 
you promise while inviting him to your town, and if you can defend him 
against the enemies, then assume the burden that you have taken. But if 
you are going to surrender him and betray him after having taken him away 
with you,