dea. 

134
The rest of the army, now 1000 soldiers, approached Badr and encamped 
themselves beyond a sand dune at Al-‘Udwat Al-Quswa. 
‘The intelligence corps’ of the Madinese army reported to the Prophet [pbuh] that a 
bloody encounter with the Makkans was inescapable, and that a daring step in this 
context had to be taken, or else the forces of evil would violate the inviolable and 
would consequently manage to undermine the noble cause of the Islam and tread 
upon its faithful adherents. The Muslims were afraid that the pagan Makkans would 
march on and start the war activities within the headquarters of Islam, Madinah. A 
move of such nature would certainly damage and produce an infamous impact on the 
dignity and stance of the Muslims. 
On account of the new grave developments, the Prophet [pbuh] held an advisory 
military emergency meeting to review the ongoing situation and exchange 
viewpoints with the army leaders. Admittedly, some Muslims feared the horrible 
encounter and their courage began to waver; in this regard, Allâh says: 
"As your Lord caused you (O Muhammad [pbuh]) to go out from your home 
with the Truth, and verily, a party among the believers disliked it, disputing 
with you concerning the Truth after it was made manifest, as if they were 
being driven to death while they were looking (at it)." [Al-Qur'an 8:5, 6] 
The Prophet [pbuh] apprised his men of the gravity of the situation and asked for 
their advice. Abu Bakr was the first who spoke on the occasion and assured the 
Prophet [pbuh] of the unreserved obedience to his command. ‘Umar was the next to 
stand up and supported the views expressed by his noble friend. Then Al-Miqdad bin 
‘Amr got up and said: "O Messenger of Allâh! Proceed where Allâh directs you to, for 
we are with you. We will not say as the Children of Israel said to Moses [AWS]: 
"Go you and your Lord and fight and we will stay here;" 
Rather we shall say: 
"Go you and your Lord and fight and we will fight along with you." 
By Allâh! If you were to take us to Bark Al-Ghimad, we will still fight resolutely with 
you against its defenders until you gained it." 
The Prophet [pbuh] thanked him and blessed him. 
The three leaders who spoke were from the Emigrants, who only constituted a minor 
section of the army. The Prophet [pbuh] wanted, and for the more reason, to hear 
the Helpers’ view because they were the majority of the soldiers and were expected 
to shoulder the brunt of the war activities. Moreover, the clauses of Al-‘Aqabah 
Pledge did not commit them to fighting beyond their territories. 
The Prophet [pbuh] then said: 
"Advise me my men!" 

135
by which he meant the Helpers, in particular. Upon this Sa‘d bin Mu‘adh stood up and 
said: "By Allâh, I feel you want us (the Helpers) to speak." The Prophet [pbuh] 
directly said: "Oh, yes!" Sa‘d said: "O Prophet of Allâh! We believe in you and we 
bear witness to what you have vouchsafed to us and we declare in unequivocal terms 
that what you have brought is the Truth. We give you our firm pledge of obedience 
and sacrifice. We will obey you most willingly in whatever you command us, and by 
Allâh, Who has sent you with the Truth, if you were to ask us to plunge into the sea, 
we will do that most readily and not a man of us will stay behind. We do not grudge 
the idea of encounter with the enemy. We are experienced in war and we are 
trustworthy in combat. We hope that Allâh will show you through our hands those 
deeds of valour which will please your eyes. Kindly lead us to the battlefield in the 
Name of Allâh." 
The Prophet [pbuh] was impressed with the fidelity and the spirit of sacrifice which 
his companions showed at this critical juncture. Then he said to them: "Forward and 
be of cheer, for Allâh has promised me one of the two (the lucrative course through 
capturing the booty or strife in the cause of Allâh against the polytheists), and by 
Allâh it is as if I now saw the enemy lying prostrate." 
In the immediate vicinity of Badr, the Prophet [pbuh] and his cavemate Abu Bakr 
conducted a scouting operation during which they managed to locate the camp of 
Quraish. They came across an old bedouin nearby whom they manipulated and 
managed to extract from him the exact location of the army of the polytheists. In the 
evening of the same day, he despatched three Emigrant leaders, ‘Ali bin Abi Talib, 
Az-Zubair bin Al-‘Awwam and Sa‘d bin Abi Waqqas to scout about for news about the 
enemy. They saw two men drawing water for the Makkan army. On interrogation, 
they admitted that they were water carriers working for Quraish. But that answer did 
not please some Muslims and they beat the two boys severely in order to exact from 
them an answer, even if it isn’t true, alluding to the caravan laden with wealth. The 
two boys thus lied, and so they were released. The Prophet [pbuh] was angry with 
those men and censured them saying: "On telling the truth, you beat them, and on 
telling a lie, you released them!" He then addressed the two boys and after a little 
conversation with them he learned a lot about the enemy: number of soldiers, their 
exact location and names of some of their notables. 
He then turned to the Muslims and said: "Hearken, Quraish has sent you their most 
precious lives." 
The same night it rained on both sides. For the polytheists it obstructed further 
progress, whereas it was a blessing for the Muslims. It cleaned them and removed 
from them the stain of Satan. Allâh sent rain to strengthen their hearts and to plant 
their feet firmly therewith. They marched a little forward and encamped at the 
farther bank of the valley. Muhammad [pbuh] stopped at the nearest spring of Badr. 
Al-Hubab bin Mundhir asked him, "Has Allâh inspired you to choose this very spot or 
is it stratagem of war and the product of consultation?" The Prophet [pbuh] replied 
"It is stratagem of war and consultation." Al-Hubab said: "This place is no good; let 
us go and encamp on the nearest water well and make a basin or reservoir full of 
water, then destroy all the other wells so that they will be deprived of the water