The Combat 
The two parties approached and grew very close to each another. The phases of fight 
started. The first combatant was the standard-bearer, Talha bin Abi Talha Al-‘Abdari, 
who was the most distinguished idolater. He was one of the bravest men of Quraish 
fighters. Muslims nicknamed him ‘the ram of the battalion.’ He came forth riding a 
camel and challenged the Muslims to a single combat. People refrained from fighting 
him due to his bravery; but Az-Zubair bin Al-‘Awwam advanced for the fight. He did 
not give the ‘Ram’ any chance to fight but fell on him like a lion on his camel’s back, 
pulled him down to the ground and slaughtered him with his sword. 
The Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] who was watching that wonderful incident exclaimed: 
Allâhu Akbar that is ‘Allâh is the Greatest’ and the Muslims exclaimed Allâhu Akbar 
too. He praised Az-Zubair when he said: 
"Every Prophet has a disciple and Az-Zubair is a disciple of mine."[As-Seerah Al-
Halaiyah 2/18] 
Soon the general engagement ensued and the fight of the two parties grew fierce 
everywhere on the battlefield. The strain of the fight was centred round the carriers 
of the standard. After the death of their leader Talha bin Abi Talha, Banu ‘Abd Ad-Dar 
alternated the mission successively. Talha’s brother, ‘Uthman, ran forward and 
seized the standard which lay by the lifeless body of his brother, chanting: "The 
standard-bearer has the right to dye its shaft in blood, till it be beaten in his hand." 
Hamzah bin ‘Abdul Muttalib attacked and dealt him a blow that cut his arm and 
shoulder and went down to his navel to uncover his lung. 

164
The standard was raised up again by Abu Sa‘d bin Abi Talha; but Sa‘d bin Abi 
Waqqas shot him with a deadly arrow that hit him at his throat and made his tongue 
hang out breathing his last. 
In another version it was narrated that Abu Sa‘d lifted the standard up and 
challenged the Muslims to fight him. ‘Ali bin Abi Talib went forth. They exchanged 
two blows. Then ‘Ali gave him a terminal blow that finished him off. 
Musafi‘ bin Talha bin Abi Talha then hoisted the standard, but was soon shot with an 
arrow by ‘Asim bin Thabit bin Abi Al-Aqlah. His brother Kilab bin Talha bin Abi Talha 
followed him picked the banner and lifted it up; but Az-Zubair bin Al-‘Awwam 
attacked him and managed to kill him. Their brother Al-Jallas bin Talha bin Abi Talha 
lifted the banner up but Talha bin ‘Ubaidu-Allâh stabbed him to death. They also said 
that it was ‘Asim bin Thabit who managed to deal a terminal blow to him. 
All those six people killed round and in defence of the standard, belonged to one 
house, the house of Abi Talha ‘Abdullah bin ‘Uthman bin ‘Abd Ad-Dar. Another man 
from Bani ‘Abd Ad-Dar, called Artat bin Sharhabeel carried the standard but he also 
was killed by ‘Ali bin Abi Talib. Others said it was Hamzah who killed him not ‘Ali. 
Then it was Shuraih bin Qariz who was killed by Quzman — he was a hypocrite who 
fought for prestige only, not in defence of Islam. Abu Zaid ‘Amr bin ‘Abd Munaf Al-
‘Abdari lifted the standard up but he was killed by Quzman too. A son of Sharhabeel 
bin Hashim Al-‘Abdari hoisted it again and was also killed by Quzman. 
So we see that ten fighters of Bani ‘Abd Ad-Dar — the standard-bearers — were 
annihilated. Seeing that none of ‘Abd Ad-Dars survived to carry the standard, a slave 
of theirs — called Sawab — came to raise it. The slave showed more admirable sorts 
of bravery and steadfastness than his former masters. Sawab, the slave went on 
fighting till his hand was cut off. So he knelt down and embraced the banner, leant it 
against his chest and neck lest it should fall down to the ground. He remained 
fighting steadily and steadfastly till he was killed. In the meanwhile he did not stop 
saying: "O Allâh, have I been excused?" Afte