ous tribes of Jews constituted the demographic presence in Yathrib (now 
Madinah): Banu Qainuqua‘, allies of Al-Khazraj tribe, Banu An-Nadir and Banu 
Quraizah who allied Al-Aws and inhabited the suburbs of Madinah. 
Naturally they held the new changes with abhorrence and were terribly hateful to 
them, simply because the Messenger of Allâh was of a different race, and this point 
was in itself too repugnant for them to reconcile with. Second, Islam came to bring 
about a spirit of rapport, to terminate the state of enmity and hatred, and to 
establish a social regime based on denunciation of the prohibited and promotion of 
the allowed. Adherence to these canons of life implied paving the way for an Arab 
unity that could work to the prejudice of the Jews and their interests at both the 
social and economic levels; the Arab tribes would then try to restore their wealth and 
land misappropriated by the Jews through usurious practices. 
The Jews of course deeply considered all these things ever since they had known 
that the Islamic Call would try to settle in Yathrib, and it was no surprise to discover 
that they harboured the most enmity and hatred to Islam and the Messenger [pbuh] 

112
even though they did not have the courage to uncover their feelings in the 
beginning. 
The following incident could attest clearly to that abominable antipathy that the Jews 
harboured towards the new political and religious changes that came to stamp the 
life of Madinah. Ibn Ishaq, on the authority of the Mother of believers Safiyah [R]Ç 
narrated: Safiyah, daughter of Huyayi bin Akhtab said: I was the closest child to my 
father and my uncle Abi Yasir’s heart. Whenever they saw me with a child of theirs, 
they should pamper me so tenderly to the exclusion of anyone else. However, with 
the advent of the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] and setting in Quba’ with Bani ‘Amr bin 
‘Awf, my father, Huyayi bin Akhtab and my uncle Abu Yasir bin Akhtab went to see 
him and did not return until sunset when they came back walking lazily and fully 
dejected. I, as usually, hurried to meet them smiling, but they would not turn to me 
for the grief that caught them. I heard my uncle Abu Yasir say to Ubai and Huyayi: 
"Is it really he (i.e. Muhammad [pbuh])?" The former said: "It is he, I swear by 
Allâh!" "Did you really recognize him?" they asked. He answered: "Yes, and my heart 
is burning with enmity towards him"[Ibn Hisham 1/518, 519] 
An interesting story that took place on the first day, the Prophet [pbuh] stepped in 
Madinah, could be quoted to illustrate the mental disturbance and deep anxiety that 
beset the Jews. ‘Abdullah bin Salam, the most learned rabbi among the Jews came 
to see the Prophet [pbuh] when he arrived, and asked him certain questions to 
ascertain his real Prophethood. No sooner did he hear the Prophet’s answers than he 
embraced Islam, but added that if his people knew of his Islamization they would 
advance false arguments against me. The Prophet [pbuh] sent for some Jews and 
asked them about ‘Abdullah bin Salam, they testified to his scholarly aptitude and 
virtuous standing. Here it was divulged to them that he had embraced Islam and on 
the spot, they imparted categorically opposite testimonies and described him as the 
most evil of all evils. In another narration ‘Abdullah bin Salam said, "O Jews! Be 
Allâh fearing. By Allâh, the only One, you know that he is the Messenger of Allâh 
sent to people with the Truth." They replied, "Yo