249
The Conquest of Makkah 
Ibn Al-Qaiyim described the conquest of Makkah as the greatest one by which Allâh 
honoured His religion, Messenger, soldiers and honest party. He thereby rescued the 
Sacred House, whose guidance all people seek. It was the greatest propitious event 
in heaven and on earth. It was the most significant prelude to a new era that was to 
witness the great march of Islamization and the entry of people into the fold of Islam 
in huge hosts. It provided an ever shining face and a most glowing source of 
inspiration to the whole earth. [Za'd Al-Ma'ad 2/160]  
Pre-Conquest Events 
According to the terms of the treaty of Hudaibiyah, the Arab tribes were given the 
option to join either of the parties, the Muslims or Quraish, with which they desired 
to enter into treaty alliance. Should any of these tribes suffer aggression, then the 
party to which it was allied would have the right to retaliate. As a consequence, Banu 
Bakr joined Quraish, and Khuza‘ah joined the Prophet [pbuh]. They thus lived in 
peace for sometime but ulterior motives stretching back to pre-Islamic period ignited 
by unabated fire of revenge triggered fresh hostilities. Banu Bakr, without caring a 
bit for the provisions of the treaty, attacked Banu Khuza‘ah in a place called Al-
Wateer in Sha‘ban, 8 A.H. Quraish helped Banu Bakr with men and arms taking 
advantage of the dark night. Pressed by their enemies, the tribesmen of Khuza‘ah 
sought the Holy Sanctuary, but here too, their lives were not spared, and, contrary 
to all accepted traditions, Nawfal, the chief of Banu Bakr, chasing them in the 
sanctified area — where no blood should be shed — massacred his adversaries. 
When the aggrieved party sought justice from their Muslim allies, the Prophet 
[pbuh], as their leader, demanded an immediate redress for not only violating the 
treaty but also slaying men allied to him in the sanctified area. Three demands were 
made, the acceptance of any one of them was imperative: 
a. to pay blood money for the victims of Khuza‘ah,  
b. to terminate their alliance with Banu Bakr; or  
c. to consider the truce to have been nullified.  
This behaviour on the part of Quraish was clearly a breach of the treaty of Al-
Hudaibiyah and was obviously an act of hostility against the allies of the Muslims, i.e. 
Banu Khuza‘ah. Quraish immediately realized the grave situation and feared the 
horrible consequences looming on the horizon. They immediately called for an 
emergency meeting and decided to delegate their chief Abu Sufyan to Madinah for a 
renewal of the truce. He directly headed for the house of his daughter Umm Habiba 
(the Prophet’s wife). But as he went to sit on the Messenger’s carpet, she folded it 
up. "My daughter," said he, "I hardly knew if you think the carpet is too good for me 
or that I am too good for the carpet." She replied, "It is the Messenger of Allâh’s 
carpet, and you are an unclean polytheist." 
Being disgusted at the curt reply of his daughter, Abu Sufyan stepped out of her 
room and went to see the Prophet [pbuh], but the latter was well aware of his tricks 
and did not hold him any assurance. He then approached Abu Bakr, but the latter too 
declined to interfere. He contacted ‘Umar to intercede but this great Companion 
made a point-blank refusal. At last he saw ‘Ali bin Abi Talib and began begging him 

250
in the most humble words, cunningly alluding to the prospects of mastery over all 
the Arabs if he were to intercede for the renewal of the treaty. ‘Ali also briefly 
regretted his inability to do anything for him. 
Abu Sufyan turned his steps back to Makkah in a state of bitter disappointment and 
utter horror. There he submitted a report of his meeting with his daughter, Abu Bakr, 
‘Umar and ‘Ali’s reaction and the meaningful silence of the Prophet. The Makkans 
were dismayed, but did not expect imminent danger.  
Preparations for the Attack on Makkah, and the Prophet’s Attempt at imposing a 
News Black-out 
On the authority of At-Tabari, the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] asked ‘Aishah [R], his 
spouse three days prior to receiving news relating to breaching of covenant, to make 
preparations peculiar to marching out for war. Abu Bakr, meanwhile, came in and 
asked ‘Aishah [R] what the matter was, showing surprise at the preparations being 
made as it was not, as he said, the usual time for war. She replied that she had no 
idea. On the morning of the third day ‘Amr bin Sâlim Al-Khuza‘i arrived in the 
company of forty horsemen to brief the Prophet [pbuh] on the plight of his people 
and seeking the Muslims’ help for retaliation. People of Madinah then got to know 
that Quraish had breached the covenant. Budail followed ‘Amr, and then Abu Sufyan 
and the news was unequivocally confirmed. 
With view of securing a complete news black-out concerning his military intentions, 
the Prophet [pbuh] despatched an eight-men platoon under the leadership of 
Qatadah bin Rab‘i in the direction of Edam, a short distance from Madinah, in 
Ramadan 8 A.H., in order to divert the attention of people and screen off the main 
target with which he was preoccupied. 
There was so much dread and fear everywhere that Hatib, one of the most trusted 
followers of the Prophet [pbuh] secretly despatched a female messenger with a letter 
to Makkah containing intimation of the intended attack. The Prophet [pbuh] received 
news from the heaven of Hatib’s action and sent ‘Ali and Al-Miqdad with instructions 
to go after her. They overtook the messenger, and after a long search discovered the 
letter carefully hidden in her locks. The Prophet [pbuh] summoned Hatib and asked 
him what had induced him to this act. He replied, "O Messenger of Allâh [pbuh]! I 
have no affinity of blood with Quraish; there is only a kind of friendly relationship 
between them and myself. My family is at Makkah and there is no one to look after it 
or to offer protection to it. My position stands in striking contrast to that of the 
refugees whose families are secure due to their blood ties with Quraish. I felt that 
since I am not related to them, I should, for the safety of my children, earn their 
gratitude by doing good to them. I swear by Allâh that I have not done this act as an 
apostate, forsaking Islam. I was prompted only by the considerations I have just 
explained." 
‘Umar wanted to cut his head off as a hypocrite, but the Prophet [pbuh] accepted his 
excuse and granted him pardon, then addressed ‘Umar saying: "Hatib is one of those 
who fought in the battle of Badr. How do you know that he is a hypocrite? Allâh is 
likely to look favourably on those who participated in that battle. Turning then, to 
Hatib, he said: "Do as you please, for I have forgiven you." 

251
After making full preparation, the Prophet [pbuh] proceeded to Makkah at the head 
of ten thousand soldiers on the 10th of Ramadan, 8 A.H. He mandated Abu Ruhm Al-
Ghifari to dispose the affairs of Madinah during his absence. When they reached Al-
Juhfa, Al-‘Abbas bin ‘Abdul Muttalib and his family came to join the Prophet [pbuh]. 
At Al-Abwa’, the Muslims came across Abu Sufyan bin Al-Harith and ‘Abdullah bin 
Omaiyah, the Prophet’s cousins, but, on account of the harm they had inflicted, and 
their satiric language, on the believers, they were not welcomed. ‘Ali addressed Abu 
Sufyan to go and beseech the Prophet [pbuh] for pardon and confess his ill-
behaviour in a manner similar to that of Yusuf’s (the Prophet Joseph) brothers: 
"They said: ‘By Allâh! Indeed Allâh has preferred you above us, and we 
certainly have been sinners.’" [Al-Qur'an 12:91] 
Abu Sufyan observed ‘Ali’s counsel, to which the Prophet quoted Allâh’s Words: 
"He said: ‘No reproach on you this day, may Allâh forgive you, and He is the 
Most Merciful of those who show mercy!’" [Al-Qur'an 12:92] 
Abu