to convey the glad tidings of victory to the Muslims there. 
The multi-ethnic and ideological structure of Madinah featured different respective 
reactions. Rumour-mongers amongst the Jews and hypocrites spread news to the 
effect that the Prophet [pbuh] had been killed, and tried to impress their false 
assumption on the fact that Zaid bin Harithah was riding Al-Qaswâ’, the Prophet 
[pbuh]’s she-camel. Having reached, the two messengers imparted to the Muslims 
the happy news of victory, and furnished accurate information about the course of 
events in order to establish the sense of reassurance deep in the hearts of the 
anxious, but now, joyous Muslims. They immediately started acclaiming Allâh’s Name 
and entertaining His praise at the top of their voices. Their chiefs went out of the city 
to wait and receive the Prophet [pbuh] on the road leading to Badr. 
Usamah bin Zaid related that they received the news of the manifest victory shortly 
after Ruqaiyah, the Prophet [pbuh]’s daughter, and the wife of ‘Uthman bin ‘Affan 
had been committed to earth. She had been terminally ill and the Prophet [pbuh] 
had asked ‘Uthman to stay in Madinah and look after her. 
Before leaving the scene of the battle, dispute concerning the spoils of war arose 
among the Muslim warriors, as the rule relating to their distribution had not yet been 
legislated. When the difference grew wider, the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] 
suspended any solution whereof until the Revelation was sent down. 
‘Ubadah bin As-Samit said: "We went out with the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] and I 
witnessed Badr with him. The battle started and Allâh, the Exalted, defeated the 
enemy. Some of the Muslims sought and pursued the enemy, some were intent on 
collecting the spoils from the enemy camp, and others were guarding the Messenger 
of Allâh [pbuh] and were on the alert for any emergency or surprise attack. When 
night came and the Muslims gathered together, those who had collected the booty 
said: "We collected it, so no one else has any right to it." Those who had pursued the 
enemy said: "You do not have more right to it than we do; we held the enemy at bay 
and then defeated them." As for the men who had been guarding the Prophet 
[pbuh], they also made similar claims to the spoils. 
At that very time, a Qur’ânic verse was revealed saying: 
"They ask you (O Muhammad [pbuh]) about the spoils of war. Say: ‘The 
spoils are for Allâh and the Messenger.’ So fear Allâh and adjust all matters 
of difference among you, and obey Allâh and His Messenger (Muhammad 
[pbuh]), if you are believers." [Al-Qur'an 8:1] 
On their way back to Madinah, at a large sand hill, the Prophet [pbuh] divided the 
spoils equally among the fighters after he had taken Al-Khums (one-fifth). When 
they reached As-Safra’, he ordered that two of the prisoners should be killed. They 
were An-Nadr bin Al-Harith and ‘Uqbah bin Abi Muait, because they had persecuted 

144
the Muslims in Makkah, and harboured deep hatred towards Allâh and His Messenger 
[pbuh]. In a nutshell, they were criminals of war in modern terminology, and their 
execution was an awesome lesson to oppressors. ‘Uqbah forgot his pride and cried 
out, "Who will look after my children O Messenger of Allâh?" The Prophet [pbuh] 
answered, "The fire (of Hell).[Sunan Abu Da'ud with 'Aun-ul-Ma'bood 3/12]" Did ‘Uqbah not 
remember the day when he had thrown the entrails of a sheep onto the head of the 
Prophet [pbuh] while he was prostrating himself in prayer, and Fatimah had come 
and washed it off him? He had also strangled the Prophet [pbuh] with his cloak if it 
had not been for Abu Bakr to intervene and release the Prophet [pbuh]. The heads of 
both criminals were struck off by ‘Ali bin Abi Talib. 
At Ar-Rawhâ’, a suburb of Madinah, the Muslim army was received by the joyous 
Madinese who had come to congratulate the Prophet [pbuh] on the manifest victory 
that Allâh had granted him. Usaid bin Hudair, acting as a mouthpiece of the other 
true believers, after entertaining Allâh’s praise, he excused himself for not having 
joined them on grounds that the Prophet [pbuh]’s intention was presumably, an 
errand aiming to intercept a caravan of camels only, he added that if it had occurred 
to him that it would be real war, he would have never tarried. The Prophet [pbuh] 
assured Usaid that he had believed him. 
The Prophet [pbuh] now entered Madinah as a man to be counted for in a new 
dimension — the military field. In consequence, a large number of the people of 
Madinah embraced Islam, which added a lot to the strength, power and moral 
standing of the true religion. 
The Prophet [pbuh] exhorted the Muslims to treat the prisoners so well to such an 
extent that the captors used to give the captives their bread (the more valued part 
of the meal) and keep the dates for themselves. 
Prisoners of war constituted a problem awaiting resolution because it was a new 
phenomenon in the history of Islam. The Prophet [pbuh] consulted Abu Bakr and 
‘Umar bin Al-Khattab as to what he should do with the prisoners. Abu Bakr 
suggested that he should ransom them, explaining this by saying: "They are after all 
our relatives, and this money would give us strength against the disbelievers, 
moreover, Allâh could guide them to Islam." ‘Umar advised killing them, saying, 
"They are the leaders of Kufr (disbelief)." The Prophet [pbuh] preferred Abu Bakr’s 
suggestion to that of ‘Umar’s. The following day, ‘Umar called on the Prophet [pbuh] 
and Abu Bakr to see them weeping. He showed extreme astonishment and inquired 
about the situation so that he might weep if it was worth weeping for, or else he 
would feign weeping. 
The Prophet [pbuh] said that a Qur’ânic verse had been revealed rebuking them for 
taking ransom from the captives rather than slaying them: 
"It is not for a Prophet that he should have prisoners of war (and free them 
with ransom) until he had made a great slaughter (among his enemies) in 
the land. You desire the good of this world (i.e. the money of ransom for 
freeing the captives), but Allâh desires (for you) the Hereafter. And Allâh is 
All-Mighty, All-Wise. Were it not a previous ordainment from Allâh, a severe 
torment would have touched you for what you took." [Al-Qur'an 8:67,68] 
The previous Divine ordainment went as follows, 

145
"Thereafter (is the time) either for generosity (i.e. free them without 
ransom) or ransom." [Al-Qur'an 47:4] 
Which included an area providing permission to take ransom, that is why no penalty 
was imposed. They were rebuked only for taking prisoners before subduing all the 
land of disbelief. Apart from this, the polytheists taken to Madinah were not only 
prisoners of war but rather archcriminals of war whom modern war penal law brings 
to justice to receive their due sentence of death or prison for life. 
The ransom for the prisoners ranged between 4000 and 1000 Dirhams in accordance 
with the captive’s financial situation. Another form of ransom assumed an 
educational dimension; most of the Makkans, unlike the Madinese, were literate and 
so each prisoner who could not afford the ransom was entrusted with ten children to 
teach them the art of writing and reading. Once the child had been proficient 
enough, the instructor would be set free. Another clan of prisoners were released 
unransomed on grounds of being hard up. Zainab, the daughter of the Prophet 
[pbuh], paid the ransom of her husband Abul-‘As with a necklace. The Muslims 
released her prisoner and returned the necklace in deference to the Prophet [pbuh] 
but on condition that Abul-‘As allow Zainab to migrate to Madinah, which he actually 
did. 
In captivity, there was also an eloquent orator called Suhail bin ‘Amr. ‘Umar 
suggested that they pull out his front teeth to disable him from speaking, but the 
Prophet [pbuh] turned down his suggestion for fear Quraish should retaliate in the 
same manner on one hand, and on the other for fear of Allâh’s wrath on the Day of 
Resurrection. 
Sa‘d bin An-Nu