hari 2/730] 
In another version, ‘Umar said, "We talked about Ghassanide preparations to invade 
us. When it was his turn to convey the news to me, he went down and returned in 
the evening. He knocked at the door violently and said ‘Is he sleeping?’ I was 
terrified but I went out to meet him. ‘Something serious had taken place.’ He said. 
‘Has the Ghassaindes arrived?’ Said I. ‘No,’ he said, ‘it is greater and more serious. 
The Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] has divorced his wives.’" [Sahih Al-Bukhari 1/334] 
This state of too much alertness manifests clearly the seriousness of the situation 
that Muslims began to experience. The seriousness of the situation was confirmed to 
a large degree by the hypocrites behaviour, when news about the Byzantines’ 
preparations reached Madinah. The fact that the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] won all 
the battles he fought, and that no power on earth could make him terrified, and that 
he had always proved to be able to overcome all the obstacles that stood in his way - 
did not prevent the hypocrites, who concealed evil in their hearts, from expecting an 
affliction to fall upon the Muslims and Islam. 
They used to harbour evil and ill-intentions against the whole process of Islam and 
the Muslims. On grounds of illusory hopes of destroying this great religious edifice, 
they erected a hotbed of conspiracy and intrigue in the form of a mosque — Masjid-
e-Darar (the mosque of harm). They approached the Prophet [pbuh] with the 
request that he should come and consecrate the place by praying in it himself. As he 
was at the moment about to start for Tabuk, he deferred compliance with their 
request till his return. Meanwhile he came to know through Divine Revelation that it 
was not a Mosque for devotion and prayer but a meeting place for the anti-Islamic 
elements. On his return, therefore, the Prophet [pbuh] sent a party to demolish the 
new structure. 
Particular News about the Byzantine and Ghassanide Preparations for War 
A magnified image of the prominent danger threatening the Muslims life was carried 
to them by the Nabateans who brought oil from Ash-Sham to Madinah. They carried 
news about Heraclius’ preparations and equipment of an enormous army counting 
over forty thousand fighters besides Lukham, Judham and other tribes allied to the 
Byzantines. They said that its vanguard had already reached Al-Balqâ’. Thus was the 
grave situation standing in ambush for the Muslims. The general situation was 
aggravated seriously by other adverse factors of too much hot weather, drought and 
the rough and rugged distance they had to cover in case they decided to encounter 
the imminent danger. 
The Messenger of Allâh’s [pbuh] concept and estimation of the situation and its 
development was more precise and accurate than all others. He thought that if he 
tarried or dealt passively with the situation in such a way that might enable the 

274
Byzantines to paddle through the Islamic controlled provinces or to go as far as 
Madinah, this would — amid these circumstances — leave the most awful impression 
on Islam as well as on the Muslims’ military credibility. 
The pre-Islamic beliefs and traditions (Al-Jahiliyah) which were at that time dying 
because of the strong decisive blow that they had already had at Hunain, could have 
had a way to come back to life once again in such an environment. The hypocrites 
who were conspiring against the Muslims so that they might stab them in the back 
whereas Byzantines would attack them from the front. If such a thing came to light 
and they succeeded in their evil attempts, the Prophet and his Companions’ efforts to 
spread Islam would collapse and their profits which were the consequences of 
successive and constant fights and invasions would be invalidated. The Messenger of 
Allâh [pbuh] realised all that very well. So — in spite of the hardships and drought 
that Muslims were suffering from — the Prophet [pbuh] was determined that the 
Muslims should invade the Byzantines and fight a decisive battle at their own 
borders. He was determined not to tarry at all in order to thwart any Roman attempt 
to approach the land of Islam. 
When the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] had made up his mind and took his final 
decision, he ordered his Companions to get ready for war and sent for the Makkans 
and the other Arab tribes asking for their assistance. 
Contrary to his habit of concealing his real intention of the invasion by means of 
declaring a false one, he announced openly his intention of meeting the Byzantines 
and fighting them. He cleared the situation to his people so that they would get 
ready, and urged them to fight in the way of Allâh. On this occasion a part of Sura