to be committed to writing, ‘Ali bin Abi Talib, who acted as a scribe began with 
the words: Bismillâh ir-Rahman ir-Raheem, i.e., "In the Name of Allâh, the Most 
Beneficent, the Most Merciful" but the Makkan plenipotentiary, Suhail bin ‘Amr 
declared that he knew nothing about Ar-Rahman and insisted upon the customary 
formula Bi-ismika Allâhumma, i.e., "In Your Name, O Allâh!" The Muslims grumbled 
with uneasiness but the Prophet [pbuh] agreed. He then went on to dictate, "This is 
what Muhammad, the Messenger of Allâh has agreed to with Suhail bin ‘Amr." Upon 
this Suhail again protested: "Had we acknowledged you as Prophet, we would not 
have debarred you from the Sacred House, nor fought against you. Write your own 
name and the name of your father." The Muslims grumbled as before and refused to 

216
consent to the change. The Prophet [pbuh], however, in the larger interest of Islam, 
attached no importance to such an insignificant detail, erased the words himself, and 
dictated instead: "Muhammad, the son of ‘Abdullah." Soon after this treaty, Khuza‘a 
clan, a former ally of Banu Hashim, joined the ranks of Muhammad [pbuh], and Banu 
Bakr sided with Quraish. 
It was during this time while the treaty was being written that Abu Jandal, Suhail’s 
son, appeared on the scene. He was brutally chained and was staggering with 
privation and fatigue. The Prophet [pbuh] and his Companions were moved to pity 
and tried to secure his release but Suhail was adamant and said: "To signify that you 
are faithful to your contract, an opportunity has just arrived." The Prophet [pbuh] 
said: "But the treaty was not signed when your son entered the camp." Upon this, he 
burst forth and said, "but the terms of the treaty were agreed upon." It was indeed 
an anxious moment. On the one hand, Abu Jandal was lamenting at the top of his 
voice, "Am I to be returned to the polytheists that they might entice me from my 
religion, O Muslims!" but, on the other hand, the faithful engagement was also 
considered to be necessary, above all other considerations. The Prophet’s heart 
welled up with sympathy, but he wanted to honour his word at all costs. He consoled 
Abu Jandal and said, "Be patient, resign yourself to the Will of Allâh. Allâh is going to 
provide for you and your helpless companions relief and means of escape. We have 
concluded a treaty of peace with them and we have taken the pledge in the Name of 
Allâh. We are, therefore, under no circumstances prepared to break it." ‘Umar bin Al-
Khattab could