136
Sa‘d bin Mu‘adh suggested that a trellis be built for the Prophet [pbuh] to function as 
headquarters for the Muslim army and a place providing reasonable protection for 
the leader. Sa‘d began to justify his proposal and said that if they had been 
victorious, then everything would be satisfactory. In case of defeat, the Prophet 
[pbuh] would not be harmed and he could go back to Madinah where there were 
more people who loved him and who would have come for help if they had known 
that he was in that difficult situation, so that he would resume his job, hold counsel 
with them and they would strive in the cause of Allâh with him again and again. 
A squad of guards was also chosen from amongst the Helpers under the leadership 
of the same man, Sa‘d bin Mu‘adh, in order to defend the Prophet [pbuh] in his 
headquarters. 
The Prophet [pbuh] spent the whole night preceding the day of the battle in prayer 
and supplication. The Muslim army, wearied with their long march, enjoyed sound 
and refreshing sleep, a mark of the Divine favour and of the state of their 
undisturbed minds. 
"(Remember) when He covered you with a slumber as a security from Him, 
and He caused rain to descend on you from the sky, to clean you thereby 
and to remove from you the Rijz (whispering, evil suggestions, etc.) of 
Satan, and to strengthen your hearts, and make your feet firm thereby." [Al-
Qur'an 8:11] 
That was Friday night, Ramadan 17th., the year 2 A.H. 
In the morning, the Prophet [pbuh] called his men to offer the prayers and then 
urged them to fight in the way of Allâh. As the sun rose over the desert, the Prophet 
[pbuh] drew up his little army, and pointing with an arrow which he held in his hand, 
arranged the ranks. 
Quraish, on the other hand, positioned their forces in Al-‘Udwat Al-Quswa opposite 
the Muslim lines. A few of them approached, in a provocative deed, to draw water 
from the wells of Badr, but were all shot dead except one, Hakeem bin Hizam, who 
later became a devoted Muslim. ‘Umair bin Wahab Al-Jumahi, in an attempt to 
reconnoiter the power of the Muslims, made a scouting errand and submitted a 
report saying that the Muslim army numbered as many as 300 men keen on fighting 
to the last man. On another reconnaissance mission he came to the conclusion that 
neither reinforcements were coming nor ambushes laid. He understood that they 
were too brave to surrender and too intent on carrying out their military duties to 
withdraw without slaying the largest number possible of the polytheists. This report 
as well as kindred relations binding the two belligerent parties together, slackened 
the desire to fight among some of the Quraishites. To counteract this reason-based 
opposition advocated by a rival of his, ‘Utbah bin Rabi‘a and others, Abu Jahl started 
an anti-campaign seeking vengeance on Muhammad [pbuh]’s followers for the 
Quraishites killed at Nakhlah. In this way, he managed to thwart the opposite 
orientation, and manipulated the people to see his evil views only.