Al-Qaiyim has made a pointed reference to the battle of Uhud and given full 
elucidation of the Divine benefits and moralities that resulted from it. Some Muslim 
scholars, on the authority of Ibn Hajar, said: The reverse in Uhud resulted from the 
neglect on the part of the archers of the explicit command of the Prophet [pbuh], 
and leaving the spot which they were ordered to safeguard to the end. In other 
words, the success of the Muslims depends upon their obedience to the Prophet 
[pbuh]. As long as they carry out his behests, Allâh will help them in facing all kinds 
of odds. But when they will set aside his commands in their pursuit of worldly riches, 
they are bound to come to grief. Another relevant issue of great significance says 
that it is customary for Prophets to be tried with different adversities; nevertheless, 
the final outcome is positively in their favour. Should the Muslims be victorious all 
the time, great many pretenders to Faith will enter the fold of Islam, and 
consequently the clear line of demarcation between true believers and hypocrites will 
become blurred. Contrarily, if the Muslims were to be defeated all the time, the final 
objective of the ministry of Prophets will not be effected. It is wise then to combine 
both success and failure so that sifting between true Muslims and hypocrites could be 
realized. 
In the aftermath of the battle of Uhud, the hypocrites disclosed their real intentions 
in words and in deeds, consequently, the Muslims got to realize the existence of 
those wicked elements working secretly in their own homeland; and of course there 
would be appropriate measures to be taken in due course of time. 
A third point in this context refers to purposeful deferment of victory in some areas 
in order to check the pride of the soul and teach the believers how to observe full 
patience in times of adversity. Trials and tests are provided by Allâh in order that the 
true believers could deservedly occupy their abode in the blessed Hereafter. 
Martyrdom, the highest ranks that the true friends of Allâh could occupy, is provided 
by Allâh to function as a passport, granted by the Lord, leading to Paradise. In brief, 
fight in the cause of Allâh is a golden opportunity for the true believers to have their 
sins effaced, and a Divinely-devised event for the disbelievers and enemies of Allâh 
to face destruction and annihilatio