colonies inside and outside Arabia. 
2. From 650 B.C. until 115 B.C. During this era, they gave up the name "Makrib" 
and assumed the designation of "Kings of Sheba". They also made Ma’rib 
their capital instead of Sarwah. The ruins of Ma’rib lie at a distance of sixty 
miles east of San‘a. 
3. From 115 B.C. until 300 A.D. During this period, the tribe of Himyar 
conquered the kingdom of Sheba and took Redan for capital instead of Ma’rib. 
Later on, Redan was called "Zifar". Its ruins still lie on Mudawwar Mountain 
near the town of "Yarim". During this period, they began to decline and fall. 
Their trade failed to a very great extent, firstly, because of the Nabetean 
domain over the north of Hijaz; secondly, because of the Roman superiority 
over the naval trade routes after the Roman conquest of Egypt, Syria and the 
north of Hijaz; and thirdly, because of the inter-tribal warfare. Thanks to the 
three above-mentioned factors, families of Qahtan were disunited and 
scattered out. 
4. From 300 A.D. until Islam dawned on Yemen. This period witnessed a lot of 
disorder and turmoil. The great many and civil wars rendered the people of 
Yemen liable to foreign subjection and hence loss of independence. During 
this era, the Romans conquered ‘Adn and even helped the Abyssinians 
(Ethiopians) to occupy Yemen for the first time in 340 A.D., making use of the 
constant intra-tribal conflict of Hamdan and Himyar. The Abyssinian 
(Ethiopian) occupation of Yemen lasted until 378 A.D., whereafter Yemen 
regained its independence. Later on, cracks began to show in Ma’rib Dam 
which led to the Great Flood (450 or 451 A.D.) mentioned in the Noble Qur’? . 

15
This was a great event which caused the fall of the entire Yemeni civilization 
and the dispersal of the nations living therein.  
In 523, Dhu Nawas, a Jew, despatched a great campaign against the Christians of 
Najran in order to force them to convert into Judaism. Having refused to do so, they 
were thrown alive into a big ditch