the greatest motives of all 
is Allâh’s bidding his Prophet to educate and purify the souls of people who had 
known nothing whatsoever about courtesy, education and culture. He had to teach 
them to comply with the necessities of civilization and to contribute to the 
solidification and the establishment of a new Islamic society. 
An essential fundamental rule of the Muslim society is to prohibit mixing of men and 
women. Providing direct education for women, though highly compelling, is 
impossible in the light of this Islamic norm. Therefore, the Prophet [pbuh] had to 
select some women of different ages and talents, and indoctrinate them 
systematically in order to educate she-bedouins and townswomen, old and young, 
and thus furnish them with the instruments of propagating the true faith. The 
Mothers of believers (i.e. wives of the Prophet [pbuh]) were in such a convenient 
position that they could convey the state of the Prophet [pbuh] and his affairs to 
people (men and women). Being educated and taught the teachings and rules of 
Islam, his wives, especially those who outlived him, played a very important role in 
conveying Prophetic traditions Ahadith to the Muslims. ‘Aishah, for instance, related 
a large number of the Prophet’s deeds and statements. 

314
His marriage to his paternal cousin Zainab bint Jahsh was a peculiar case which 
aimed at eradicating a deeply rooted pre-Islamic tradition — i.e. the adoption of 
children. In Al-Jahiliyah the Arabs used to consider an adopted person exactly like a 
real son or daughter as far as rights and sanctities are concerned. That Jahiliyah 
tradition had been so deeply rooted in their hearts that it was not easy to remove or 
uproot it. This tradition in fact affronts the basic principles of Islam; especially those 
concerned with marriage, divorce and inheritance and some other cases, and 
brought about lots of corruptions and indecencies. Naturally Islam stands against 
such deeds, and attempts to remove them from the Islamic society. 
For the eradication of this tradition, Allâh, the Exalted, bid His Messenger [pbuh] to 
marry his cousin Zainab bint Jahsh, who was an ex-wife to Zaid. She was at variance 
with Zaid to an extent that he intended to divorce her — that was at the time when 
the Confederates (Al-Ahzab) were making an evil alliance against the Messenger of 
Allâh [pbuh] and against the Muslims. The Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] feared that the 
hypocrites, the idolaters, and the Jews would make a propaganda out of it and try to 
influence some Muslims of weak hearts. That was why he urged Zaid not to divorce 
her, in order not to get involved into that trial. 
Undoubtedly this hesitation and partiality were alien to the character of the Prophet 
[pbuh] . They did not apply to the power of determination and will with which he had 
been sent. Allâh, the Exalted, blamed him for that by saying:  
"And (remember) when you said to him (Zaid bin Haritha ÑÖì Çááå Úäå — 
the freed slave of the Prophet [pbuh]) on whom Allâh has bestowed grace 
(by guiding him to Islam) and you (O Muhammad [pbuh] too) have done 
favour (by manumitting him), ‘Keep your wife to yourself, and fear Allâh.’ 
But you did hide in yourself (i.e. what Allâh has already made known to you 
that He will give her to you in marriage) that which Allâh will make 
manifest, you did fear the people (i.e. Muhammad [pbuh] married the 
divorced wife of his manumitted slave) whereas Allâh had a better right that 
you should fear him." [Al-Qur'an 33:37] 
Finally Zaid divorced Zainab and the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] married her at the 
time he laid siege to Bani Quraiza. That was after she had finished her Iddat (i.e. 
period during which a widow or a divorcee may not remarry). Allâh Himself had 
already ordained it, and so gave him no other alternative. Allâh had even started the 
marriage Himself by saying:  
"So when Zaid had accomplished his desire from her (i.e. divorced her), We 
gave her to you in marriage, so that (in future) there may be no difficulty to 
the believers in respect of (the marriage of) the wives of their adopted sons 
when the latter have no desire to keep them (i.e. they have divorced 
them)." [Al-Qur'an 33:37] 
And that was in order to break down the tradition o