atoons 
After the Conquest 
Upon returning from this long successful travel, the Messenger of Allâh [pbuh] 
stayed in Madinah where he received delegates and dispatched agents and appointed 
preachers and callers to Islam everywhere. Those whose hearts were still full of 
prejudice against Islam and therefore were too proud to embrace Allâh’s religion, 
were decisively muffled on their non-acquiescence in the status quo prevalent then in 
Arabia. 
Here is a mini-image about the believed ones. We have already stated that the 
Messenger’s arrival in Madinah was by the last days of the eighth year of Al-Hijra. No 
sooner the crescent of Muharram of the ninth year turned up than the Messenger of 
Allâh [pbuh] dispatched the believed ones, to the tribes as shown in the list below: 
1. ‘Uyaina bin Hisn 
to Bani Tamim. 
2. Yazeed bin Husain 
to Aslam and Ghifar. 
3. ‘Abbad bin Bishr Al-Ashhali 
to Sulaim and Muzainah. 
4. Rafi‘ bin Mukaith 
to Juhainah. 
5. ‘Amr bin Al-‘As 
to Bani Fazarah. 
6. Ad-Dahhak bin Sufyan 
to Bani Kilab. 
7. Basheer bin Sufyan 
to Bani Ka‘b. 
8. Ibn Al-Lutabiyah Al-Azdi 
to Bani Dhubyan. 
9. Al-Muhajir bin Abi Omaiyah 
to Sana‘a’ (Al-Aswad Al-‘Ansi called at him 
when he was in it). 
10. Ziyad bin Labid 
to Hadramout. 
11. ‘Adi bin Hatim 
to Tai’ and Bani Asad. 
12. Malik bin Nuwairah 
to Bani Hanzalah. 
13. Az-Zabraqan bin Badr 
to Bani Sa‘d (a portion of them). 
14. Qais bin ‘Asim 
to Bani Sa‘d (a portion of them). 
15. Al-‘Alâ’ bin Al-Hadrami 
to Al-Bahrain. 
16. ‘Ali bin Abi Talib 
to Najran (to collect Sadaqa & Jizya). 
Some of these agents were despatched in Muharram, 7 A.H., others were sent later 
until the tribes they were heading for had completely converted into Islam. Such a 
move clearly demonstrates the great success that the Islamic Da‘wah (Call) enjoyed 
after Al-Hudaibiyah Treaty. However, shortly after the conquest of Makkah, people 
began to embrace Islam in large hosts. 
The Platoons 
In the same way that the believed ones were dispatched to the tribes, we 
understand that dispatching some more platoons to all regions of Arabia is a 
necessity for the prevalence and domination of security on all lands of Arabia. 
Here is a list of those platoons: 
1. ‘Uyaina bin Hisn Al-Fazari’s platoon in Al-Muharram, the ninth year of Al-Hijra 
to Bani Tamim. It consisted of fifty horsemen, none of them was an Emigrant 
or a Helper.  

269
This expedition was dispatched due to the fact that Bani Tamim had already 
urged other tribes not to pay tribute (Al-Jizya) and eventually stopped them 
from paying it. 
Therefore, ‘Uyaina bin Hisn set out to fight them. All the way long he marched 
by night and lurked by day. He went on that way till he overtook them and 
attacked them in the desert. They fled back for their lives. Eleven men, 
twenty-one women and thirty boys were captured then. He drove them back 
to Madinah and were housed in Ramlah bint Al-Harith’s residence. Ten of their 
leaders, who came to the Prophet’s door, called out unto him saying: "O 
Muhammad come out and face us." When he went out they held him and 
started talking. 
He exchanged talk with them for a while then left them and went to perform 
the noon-prayer. After prayer he sat in the mosque-patio. They proclaimed a 
desire to show boasting and self-pride. For this purpose they introduced their 
orator ‘Utarid bin Hajib who delivered his speech. The Messenger of Allâh 
[pbuh] asked Thabit bin Qais bin Shammas — the Muslim orator — to 
respond. He did that. In return, they brought forth their poet Az-Zabraqan bin 
Badr who recited some boastful poetry. Hassan bin Thabit, the poet of Islam, 
promptly replied back. When talks and poetry came to an end, Al-Aqra‘ bin 
Habis said: "Their orator is more eloquent than ours, and their poet is more 
poetically learned than ours. Their voices and sayings excel ours, as well." 
Eventually they announced their embracing Is