ter their sacrificial animals, but they were too depressed to do 
that. The Prophet [pbuh] gave instructions in this regard three times but with 
negative response. He told his wife Umm Salamah about this attitude of his 
Companions. She advised that he himself take the initiative, slaughter his animal and 
have his head shaved. Seeing that, the Muslims, with rended hearts, started to 
slaughter their animals and shave their heads. They even almost killed one another 
because of their distress. The Prophet [pbuh] prayed three times for those who 
shaved their heads and once for those who cut their hair. A camel was sacrificed on 
behalf of seven men and a cow on behalf of the same number of people. The Prophet 
[pbuh] sacrificed a camel which once belonged to Abu Jahl and which the Muslims 
had seized as booty at Badr, thus enraging the polytheists. During Al-Hudaibiyah 
campaign, the Prophet [pbuh] permitted Ka‘b bin ‘Ujrah, who was in a state of Ihram 
(state of ritual consecration of the pilgrim) for ‘Umrah (lesser pilgrimage) to shave 
his head due to illness, on the condition that he will pay compensation by sacrificing 
a sheep, fasting for three days or feeding six needy persons. Concerning this, the 
following verse was revealed: 
"And whosoever of you is ill or has an ailment in his scalp (necessitating 
shaving), he must pay a Fidyah (ransom) of either fasting (three days) or 
giving Sadaqa (feeding six poor persons) or offering sacrifice (one sheep)." 
[Al-Qur'an 2:196] 

217
Meanwhile some believing women emigrated to Madinah and asked the Prophet 
[pbuh] for refuge which they were granted. When their families demanded their 
return, he would not hand them back because the following verse was revealed: 
"O you who believe! When believing women come to you as emigrants, 
examine them, Allâh knows best as to their Faith, then if you know them for 
true believers, send them not back to the disbelievers, they are not lawful 
(wives) for the disbelievers nor are the disbelievers lawful (husbands) for 
them. But give the disbelievers that (amount of money) which they have 
spent [as their Mahr] to them. And there will be no sin on you to marry 
them if you have paid their Mahr to them. Likewise hold not the disbelieving 
women as wives …" [Al-Qur'an 60:10] 
The reason why the believing women were not handed back was either because they 
were not originally included in the terms of the treaty, which mentioned only men, or 
because the Qur’ân abrogated any terms dealing with women in the verse: 
"O Prophet! When believing women come to you to give you the Bai‘a 
(Pledge), that they will not associate anything in worship with Allâh …" [Al-
Qur'an 60:12] 
This is the verse which forbade Muslim women from marrying disbelieving men. 
Likewise, Muslim men were commanded to terminate their marriages to disbelieving 
women. In compliance with this injunction, ‘Umar bin Al-Khattab divorced two wives 
he had married before