History

The South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) is an economic and political organization of eight countries in South Asia.

It was established in 1985 when the Heads of State of Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka formally adopted the charter.

Afghanistan joined as the 8th member of SAARC in 2007.

Objectives

As it aims to promote economic growth, social progress and cultural development within the South Asian region. The objectives of SAARC, as defined in its charter, are as follows:

Promote the welfare of the peoples of South Asia and improve their quality of life.

Accelerate economic growth, social progress and cultural development in the region by providing all individuals the opportunity to live in dignity and realize their full potential.

Promote and strengthen collective self-reliance among the countries of South Asia.

Contribute to mutual trust, understanding and appreciation of one another’s problems.

Promote active collaboration and mutual assistance in the economic, social, cultural, technical and scientific fields.

Strengthen co-operation with other developing countries.

Strengthen co-operation among themselves in international forms on matters of common interest; and Cooperate with international and regional organization with similar aims and purposes.

Structure and Process

Cooperation in SAARC is based on respect for the five principles of sovereign equality, territorial integrity, political independence, non-interference in internal affairs of the Member States and mutual benefit.

Regional cooperation is seen as a complement to the bilateral and multilateral relations of SAARC Member States.

SAARC Summits are held annually and the country hosting the Summit holds the Chair of the Association. Decisions are made on agreement basis while bilateral and controversial issues are excluded from the deliberations of SAARC.

In addition to the eight Member States, nine Observer States join SAARC Summits: China, the US, Myanmar, Iran, Japan, South Korea, Australia, Mauritius and the European Union.

Secretary-General of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation

Incumbent Esala Weerakoon since 1 March 2020

Residence: Kathmandu, Nepal

Appointer: Council of Ministers of the SAARC nations

Term length: Three year

Areas of Cooperation (Member States agreed on the following)

Agriculture and rural development

Education and culture

Biotechnology

Economic, trade and finance

Energy

Environment

Information, Communication and Media

Poverty alleviation

Security aspects

People-to-People Contacts

Funding mechanism

Social development

