Sustainable Developmental Goals and Pakistan

The SDGs work in the spirit of partnership to make the right choices now to improve life, in a sustainable way, for future generations. They provide clear guidelines and targets for all countries to adopt in accordance with their own priorities and the environmental challenges of the world at large. The SDGs are an inclusive agenda. They tackle the root causes of poverty and unite us together to make a positive change for both people and planet. "Poverty eradication is at the heart of the 2030 Agenda, and so is the commitment to leave no-one behind.

The SDGs are a bold commitments to tackle challenges facing the world today. All 17 Goals interconnect, meaning success in one affects success for others. Dealing with the threat of climate change impacts how we manage our fragile natural resources, achieving gender equality or better health helps eradicate poverty, and fostering peace and inclusive societies will reduce inequalities and help economies prosper. In short, this is the greatest chance we have to improve life for future generations.

Pakistan Sustainable Development Goals

Pakistan has displayed commendable commitment to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development as it was one of the first countries to endorse it globally in 2015. On 16th February 2016, the Parliament unanimously approved the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) as the national development agenda. It also formed the Parliamentary SDGs Secretariat based at the National Assembly one of the few countries to do so. This process of legislation was the first and crucial step in mainstreaming and localizing the SDGs.

The process of localizing the SDGs in Pakistan has been an inclusive process relying on evidence based solutions to transform abstract SDG aspirations into real and objective targets for all stakeholders, including local actors. The 18th constitutional amendment devolved several public functions including the provision of social services from the federal to the provincial governments.

