The SDGs, providing a comprehensive long-term strategy for achieving inclusive growth and sustainable development.

POVERTY (SDG 1)

Eradicating poverty in all its forms remains one of the greatest challenges facing humanity.

Globally, millions of people are still living on less than US$1.25 a day, many lacking access to adequate food, clean drinking water and sanitation. Women are more likely to live in poverty than men due to unequal access to paid work and education.

New threats brought on by climate change, conflict and food insecurity, mean even more work is needed to bring people out of poverty. This involves targeting the most vulnerable, increasing access to basic resources and services, and supporting communities affected by conflict and climate-related disasters.

Zero hunger (SDG 2)

Unfortunately, extreme hunger and malnutrition remain a huge barrier to development in many countries. The SDGs aim to end all forms of hunger and malnutrition by 2030, making sure all people especially children have access to sufficient and nutritious food all year round. This involves promoting sustainable agricultural practices: supporting small scale farmers and allowing equal access to land, technology and markets. It also requires international cooperation to ensure investment in infrastructure and technology to improve agricultural productivity. Together with the other goals set out here, we can end hunger by 2030.

HEALTH (SDG 3)

The deaths can be avoided through prevention and treatment, education, immunization campaigns, and healthcare. The Sustainable Development Goals make a bold commitment to various diseases like tuberculosis, malaria and other communicable diseases by 2030. The aim is to achieve universal health coverage, and provide access to safe and affordable medicines and vaccines for all. Supporting research and development for vaccines is an essential part of this process as well.

QUALITY EDUCATION (SDG 4)

Children from the poorest households are up to four times more likely to be out of school than those of the richest households. Disparities between rural and urban areas also remain high.

Achieving inclusive and quality education for all reaffirms the belief that education is one of the most powerful and proven vehicles for sustainable development. This goal ensures that all girls and boys complete free primary and secondary schooling by 2030. It also aims to provide equal access to affordable vocational training, to eliminate gender and wealth disparities, and achieve universal access to a quality higher education.

GENDER EQUALITY (SDG 5)

Ending all forms of discrimination against women and girls is not only a basic human right, but it also crucial to accelerating sustainable development. It has been proven time and again, that empowering women and girls has a multiplier effect, and helps drive up economic growth and development across the board.

The SDGs aim to build on these achievements to ensure that there is an end to discrimination against women and girls everywhere.

WATER SCARCITY (SDG 6)

Water scarcity affects more than 40 percent of people around the world, an alarming figure that is projected to increase with the rise of global temperatures as a result of climate change.

By 2050, it is projected that at least one in four people will be affected by recurring water shortages.

Ensuring universal access to safe and affordable drinking water for all by 2030 requires we invest in adequate infrastructure, provide sanitation facilities, and encourage hygiene at every level. Protecting and restoring water-related ecosystems such as forests, mountains, wetlands and rivers is essential if we are to mitigate water scarcity. More international cooperation is also needed to encourage water efficiency and support treatment technologies in developing countries.

AFFORDABLE CLEAN ENERGY (SDG 7)

Ensuring universal access to affordable electricity by 2030 means investing in clean energy sources such as solar, wind and thermal. Adopting cost-effective standards for a wider range of technologies could also reduce the global electricity consumption.

Expanding infrastructure and upgrading technology to provide clean energy in all developing countries is a crucial goal that can both encourage growth and help the environment.

DECENT WORK AND ECONOMIC GROWTH (SDG 8)

The SDGs promote sustained economic growth, higher levels of productivity and technological innovation. Encouraging entrepreneurship and job creation are key to this. With these targets in mind, the goal is to achieve full and productive employment, and decent work, for all women and men by 2030.

INDUSTRY INNOVATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE (SDG 9)

Promoting sustainable industries, and investing in scientific research and innovation, are all important ways to facilitate sustainable development. Investment in infrastructure and innovation are crucial drivers of economic growth and development. With over half the world population now living in cities, mass transport and renewable energy are becoming ever more important, as are the growth of new industries and information and communication technologies.

Technological progress is also key to finding lasting solutions to both economic and environmental challenges, such as providing new jobs and promoting energy efficiency.

To end digital divide is to ensure equal access to information and knowledge, as well as foster innovation and entrepreneurship.

REDUCED INEQUALITIES (SDG 10)

Income inequality is a global problem that requires global solutions. This involves improving the regulation and monitoring of financial markets and institutions, encouraging development assistance and foreign direct investment to regions where the need is greatest. Facilitating the safe migration and mobility of people is also key to bridging the widening divide.

These widening disparities require the adoption of sound policies to empower the bottom percentile of income earners, and promote economic inclusion of all regardless of gender, race or ethnicity.

SUSTAINABLE CITIES AND COMMUNITIES (SDG 11)

Extreme poverty is often concentrated in urban spaces, and national and city governments struggle to accommodate the rising population in these areas. Making cities safe and sustainable means ensuring access to safe and affordable housing, and upgrading slum settlements. It also involves investment in public transport, creating green public spaces, and improving urban planning and management in a way that is both participatory and inclusive.

More than half of the world's population now live in urban areas. Sustainable development cannot be achieved without significantly transforming the way we build and manage our urban spaces. The rapid growth of cities in the developing world, coupled with increasing rural to urban migration, has led to a boom in mega-cities.

RESPONSIBLE CONSUMPTION AND PRODUCTION (SDG 12)

Encouraging industries, businesses and consumers to recycle and reduce waste is equally important, as is supporting developing countries to move towards more sustainable patterns of consumption by 2030. A large share of the world population is still consuming far too little to meet even their basic needs. Achieving economic growth and sustainable development requires that we urgently reduce our ecological path by changing the way we produce and consume goods and resources. Agriculture is the biggest user of water worldwide, and irrigation now claims close to 70 percent of all freshwater for human use. The efficient management of our shared natural resources, and the way we dispose of toxic waste and pollutants, are important targets to achieve this goal.

CLIMATE ACTION (SDG 13)

There is no country in the world that is not experiencing first-hand the drastic effects of climate change. Global warming is causing long-lasting changes to our climate system, which threatens irreversible consequences if we do not take action now.

The annual average losses from earthquakes, tsunamis, tropical cyclones and flooding amount to hundreds of billions of dollars, in disaster risk management alone. This requires urgent collective action to tackle.

LIFE BELOW WATER (SDG 14)

Oceans also absorb about 30 percent of the carbon dioxide produced by humans, and we are seeing a 26 percent rise in ocean acidification since the beginning of the industrial revolution. Marine pollution, an overwhelming majority of which comes from land-based sources, is reaching alarming levels.

The SDGs aim to sustainably manage and protect marine and coastal ecosystems from pollution, as well as address the impacts of ocean acidification. Enhancing conservation and the sustainable use of ocean-based resources through international law will also help mitigate some of the challenges facing our oceans.

The world's oceans their temperature, chemistry, currents and life drive global systems that make the Earth habitable for humankind. How we manage this vital resource is essential for humanity as a whole, and to counter balance the effects of climate change. Billions of people depend on marine and coastal biodiversity for their livelihoods.

LIFE ON LAND (SDG 15)

Human life depends on the earth as much as the ocean for our sustenance and livelihoods. Plant life provides 80 percent of our human diet, and we rely on agriculture as an important economic resource and means of development. Forests account for 30 percent of the Earth's surface, providing vital habitats for millions of species and important sources for clean air and water; as well as being crucial for combating climate change.

The SDGs aim to conserve and restore the use of terrestrial ecosystems such as forests, wetlands, drylands and mountains by 2020. Halting deforestation is also vital to mitigating the impact of climate change. Urgent action must be taken to reduce the loss of natural habitats and biodiversity which are part of our common heritage.

PEACE JUSTICE AND STRONG INSTITUTIONS (SDG 16)

Without peace, stability, human rights and effective governance, based on the rule of law, we cannot hope for sustainable development. We are living in a world that is increasingly divided. Some regions enjoy sustained levels of peace, security and prosperity, while others fall into seemingly endless cycles of conflict and violence. This is by no means inevitable and must be addressed. High levels of violence and insecurity have a destructive impact on a country's development, affecting economic growth.

The SDGs aim to significantly reduce all forms of violence, and work with governments and communities to find lasting solutions to conflict and insecurity. Strengthening the rule of law and promoting human rights is key to this process.

PARTNERSHIPS FOR THE GOALS (SDG 17)

The SDGs can only be realized with a strong commitment to global partnership and cooperation.

Promoting international trade, and helping developing countries increase their exports, is all part of achieving a universal rules-based and equitable trading system that is fair and open, and benefits all.

The world today is more interconnected than ever before. Improving access to technology and knowledge is an important way to share ideas and foster innovation. Coordinating policies to help developing countries manage their debt, as well as promoting investment for the least developed, is vital to achieve sustainable growth and development.

