Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO)

The Economic Cooperation Organization or ECO is an Asian political and economic intergovernmental organization established as Regional Cooperation for Development (RCD) in 1964 by the leaders of Iran, Pakistan, and Turkey.

The Organization was given a new name as “Economic Cooperation Organization” in 1985. It provides a platform to discuss ways to improve development and promote trade and investment opportunities.

The following ten countries are at present the member states of ECO: Afghanistan, Republic of Azerbaijan, Islamic Republic of Iran, Republic of Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz Republic, Islamic Republic of Pakistan, Republic of Tajikistan, Republic of Turkey, Turkmenistan, Republic of Uzbekistan.

In the aftermath of the collapse of Soviet Union, the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and six former Soviet Republics, namely, Republic of Azerbaijan, Republic of Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz Republic, Republic of Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and the Republic of Uzbekistan also joined the Organization, forming one of the biggest regional blocs in Asia.

Over the past three decades, the ECO Member States have been collaborating to accelerate the pace of regional development through their common endeavors. Besides shared cultural and historic affinity, they have been able to use the existing infrastructural and business links to further fortify their resolve to transfer their hopes and aspirations into a tangible reality.

Purpose Among the member states (ECO)

Promoting economic

Technical cooperation

Cultural cooperation

The overall objective of the Organization is the sustainable economic development of its Member States and the Region as a whole.

In March 2017, Heads of States/Government of the Member States in their 13th Summit in Islamabad endorsed “ECO Vision 2025” where main directions of the ECO in the years to come are drawn.

The 14th ECO Summit was convened virtually on March 4, 2021 under the theme of ‘Regional Economic Cooperation in the aftermath of COVID-19’.

The Heads of States/Government of the Member States recommended various significant initiatives aimed at pushing the process of development in the region in the aftermath of COVID-19.

