Cultural Diversity of Pakistan

Introduction
Definitions –

Culture: Total lifestyle and overall behavior of society which includes language, dress, living, habits, customs, beliefs, traditions, etc. 

E.B Taylor defines Culture as; “The complex whole which includes knowledge, beliefs, art, morals, custom and any all other capabilities and habits acquired by man as members of society.” 

 Diversity: acceptance of positive variations, and variety in all aspects of life. Unity:  condition of the brotherhood of respecting each other, Urdu language, and religion.

 National cohesion:  Urdu is an instrument, the common script of all languages. 

Integration: coordination of mental processes, Urdu national solidarity, common heritage, and struggle for freedom.

Culture is defined as a human creation. It is the human part of the environment. Culture is the non-biological aspect of life. It is the process of generating and sharing meaning within a social system.

 This social system is comprised of values, norms, and ways of acting.

 So culture comprises the ways we interact, behave and communicate with one another. 

Culture is learned from parents, schools and media, and the broader community. 

Meaning of Culture: Culture includes all the mental, spiritual and physical activities of a nation. It includes basic beliefs, ideas, values, customs, codes, institutions, tools, techniques, works of art, religions, and rituals dominant in a given society



Features

Religious Uniformity: Pakistan Culture is an Islamic Culture: Pakistan is an Ideological Islamic State. Its very existence is due to Islam, so Pakistani culture is primarily based on the Islamic way of life.

All other ingredients of culture are inspired by Islam. Pakistani culture is highlighted by its grandeur, simplicity, firm convictions, and noble deeds and ideas.

So, in the course of more than three decades of its existence, Pakistan has evolved a distinct culture of life of its own which is based on a distinct philosophy and values of life as articulated by Islam.



2- Mixed Culture: Pakistani culture is mixed culture although the majority of people are Muslims by birth and faith. But there is a great influence of Hindus and British culture on the present Pakistani society.

Inhabitants of different provinces and areas of Pakistan have their values and traits. Food, clothes, languages, and traditions differ from one another.

Punjabis, Sindhis, Balochis, Pathans, Brohis, Kashmiris Makranis, and Saraikis lead their respective cultural life but they are also connected with a common culture. 

3- Dress: Dress is an important manifestation of culture. Dresses in a Muslim society, designed and intended to cover human body nudity are prohibited in Islam. Different dresses are used in rural and urban areas. The male members of rural society wear Dhoti, Kurta, and Turban. Female members wear Shalwar, Kurta, and Dupatta both in rural and urban areas. Sherwani, Waistcoat, coat, and pent are used in the urban areas by the men. 



4- Food: Variety of food is available in Pakistan. Different food is liked in different provinces and areas. Vegetables, pulses, rice, and meat are the favorite dishes. Meat and fruits are preferred in the province of N.W.F.P and Baluchistan. Milk and lassi are part of the food in Punjab. Halal meat is provided in all parts of Pakistan.

 5- Social Values: Social values have become an integral part of Pakistani Culture. 

The inhabitants of four provinces and areas believe in noble social values. The elders are respected and Youngers receive love from them.

 Zakat and charities are provided to the poor. People participate in the pleasures and grief of one another The female enjoys equal rights and possess respectable status. 

They have every right to purchase and maintain the property. Woman work in offices, factories, farms, and educational institutions. In rural areas, women work on the side of the field side by side with the men folk. 

6- Language: Several languages are spoken in Pakistan. Some of them are Punjabi, Sindhi, Pashto, and Balochi. 

But Urdu is spoken and understood in all parts of Pakistan. The official language is the media of communication between all regions of Pakistan.

 The English language cannot be deprived of official status yet the majority can neither understand nor speak it. However Urdu, simple and easy, is our national Language

7- Literature and Poetry: Pakistan literature originates from when Pakistan gained its nationhood as a Sovereign state in 1947. A body of literature unique to Pakistan has emerged innearly all major Pakistani languages, including Urdu, English, Punjabi, Pashto, Seraiki, Balochi, and Sindhi. Poetry is a highly respected art and profession in Pakistan.



The enthusiasm for poetry exists at a regional level as well, with nearly all of Pakistan`s provincial languages continuing the legacy. 

The Urdu language has a rich tradition of poetry and includes the famous poets Mirza Ghalib, Faiz Ahmad Faiz, Ahmad Faraz, and Ahmad Nadeem Qasimi. Pakistani poetry also has blends of other regional languages. 

8-Sports: The official national sport of Pakistan is field Hockey, and Polo is recognized as the state sport, although cricket, squash, badminton, and kabaddi are also very popular. Pakistan enjoys a high position in the field of hockey. Our hockey team has won many great tournaments from time to time. Pakistan won Olympic Gold Medal in Hockey in Rome 1960, Mexico 1964, and Loss Angle 1984. Pakistan has also won the Hockey World Cup four times (1971, 1978,1982and 1994). 



The cricket team has won the Cricket World Cup in 1992. They won the 20-20 International World Cup in 2009. The team also won the Asia Cup in 1986, 1990, and 1994. We are the world Champions in Squash. Jahangir Khan is our World Champion and is regarded as World`s No 1 Squash Player.

9-Urs and Festivals:A large number of Urs and festivals are celebrated in Pakistan every year. Urs and festivals are arranged in spring the season. Some important festivals and urs are as under • Horse and Cattle Show • Sheendor (Gilgit) Polo matches • Annual Sibbi Mela • Basant Mela • Urs Hazrat Shah Rukin-e-Alam, Multan • Urs Hazrat Ali Hajweri, Lahore • Urs Hazrat Fareed-ud-din Ganj Shakar, Pakpattan • Urs Hazrat Madhood Lal Hussain, Lahore • Urs Hazrat Saidan Shah(Punjab) • Urs Hazrat Sachal Sarmast(Sindh) • Urs Hazrat Abdul Lateef Bhittai(Sindh)

10-Customs and Traditions: Customs and Traditions are an important feature of Pakistani Culture. Different customs and traditions are observed on different occasions in Pakistan. • Marriage • Birth of a Child • Death Ceremonies. 

i- Marriage: Marriage is an Islamic responsibility. Nikkah is performed on a fixed day. The relatives and friends of the families of the bride and bridegroom assemble together. 

Dowry is also arranged according to financial position. The parents of bride groom arrange a Walima Party. Spending of a lot of money on meals has been forbidden by the Government of Pakistan. 

ii. Birth of a Child: Aqiqa has performed on the occasion of the birth of a child. Relatives and friends are invited. One goat for a female and two goats for a male child are sacrificed in the name of Allah, Azaan is called out in the ears of the newly born baby. Special gifts are presented by relatives and friends to the baby.

 iii. Death Ceremonies: All the relatives and friends get together at the house of the deceased to express their sorrow and condolence. The dead body is buried in the graveyard after the Namaz-e-Janaza.

 Some families arrange the Qul Khawani and Chehlum. 

11-Fine Arts: I. Architecture: The architecture of the areas now constituting Pakistan can be traced to four distinct periods: Pre-Islamic, Colonial, and postcolonial. Many historical buildings were built by the Muslim rulers.

 The Shahi Fort of Lahore, Shahi Masjid Lahore, Wazir Khan Masjid, Shalimar Gardens, Chauburji, Tombs of Jahangir, and Noor Jahan are the models of our Old Culture. Some magnificent buildings have been constructed after the creation of Pakistan like the Tomb of the Quaid -e-Azam, Alfalah building, Faisal Masjid, and Shakr partisan.

II. Handicrafts: Embroidery, leather works, glazed pottery, woodwork, carpet making, metal crafts, and ivory are essential parts of our culture. Pakistan craftsmen are known for their high-quality works which are very popular in foreign countries. 

III. Paintings: Paintings of Pakistani artists have touched the heights of fame. Ustad Allah Baksh, Ajaz Anwar, Gulgee, Jamil Naqsh, and Sadequain are prominent painters of Pakistan. Pakistan vehicle art is popular folk art.

IV. Performing Arts: a. Music: Pakistani Music is represented by a wide variety of Forms. It ranges from traditional styles such as Qawwali and Ghazal to more modern forms that fuse traditional Pakistani music with western music. Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan was internationally renowned for creating a form of music that synchronized Qawwali with western music. There are also diverse traditions of folk music, as well as modern styles. 

