Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO)

Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO), also known as the Shanghai Pact

The Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) is an intergovernmental organization founded in Shanghai on 15 June 2001.

The SCO currently comprises eight Member States (China, India, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Russia, Pakistan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan), four Observer States interested in acceding to full membership (Afghanistan, Belarus, Iran, and Mongolia) and six “Dialogue Partners” (Armenia, Azerbaijan, Cambodia, Nepal, Sri Lanka and Turkey).

Since its inception in 2001, the SCO has mainly focused on regional security issues, its fight against regional terrorism, ethnic separatism and religious extremism.

To date, the SCO’s priorities also include regional development.

It is the world's largest regional organization covering, 40% of the world population, and more than 20% of global GDP.

The Shanghai Cooperation Organization Charter was signed during SCO Heads of State meeting in June 2002, and entered into force on 19 September 2003. This is the fundamental statutory document which outlines the organization's goals and principles, as well as its structure and core activities.

Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) is politico-economic bloc having two South Asian members, Pakistan and India. On June 2017, Pakistan was granted permanent membership in the SCO during its 16th Heads of State Summit in Astana (Capital of Kazakhstan). By associating itself as a permanent member, summit allows Pakistan to contribute to regional development alongside other key regional players, Russia and China and India. It shows that multilateralism was having a calming effect on a regional conflict.

Through CPEC, Pakistan offering the SCO member countries an economic hallway. Moreover, SCO participation will help enhance Pakistan's worldwide socio-economic objectives.

Military exercises are also regularly conducted among members to promote cooperation and coordination against terrorism and other external threats, and to maintain regional peace and stability.

The SCO's main goals are as follows:

Strengthening mutual trust and neighborliness among the member states.

Promoting their effective cooperation in politics, trade, economy, research, technology and culture, as well as in education, energy, transport, tourism, environmental protection, and other areas; making joint efforts to maintain and ensure peace, security and stability in the region; and moving towards the establishment of a democratic, fair and rational new international political and economic order.

The SCO pursues its internal policy based on the principles of mutual trust, mutual benefit, equality, mutual consultations, respect for cultural diversity, and a desire for common development, while its external policy is conducted in accordance with the principles of non-alignment, non-targeting any third country.

The Heads of State Council (HSC) is the supreme decision-making body in the SCO. It meets once a year and adopts decisions and guidelines on all important matters of the organization. The SCO discusses the organization's multilateral cooperation strategy and priority areas, to resolve current important economic and other cooperation issues, and also to approve the organization's annual budget. The SCO's official languages are Russian and Chinese.

