Election of 1937 & Congress Ministries

Even though Muslim League and Congress were against the Government of India Act 1935, yet it was implemented.

Now, what lay before them was the task of persuading their concerned masses to support them in the upcoming elections. But Muslim League, which stood for separate electorates, was unfortunately divided in several factions owing to personal and ideological differences.

Congress, on the other hand, was raising slogans of joint electorates. Congress also wanted Hindi to be declared as the official language in the Deva Nagri script, while Muslims were in favour of Urdu in Persian script to be officially declared as the national language of the Indian sub-continent.

The result of elections came as a huge shock to both the parties. Congress, who claimed to be representing 95% of the total Indian population, could not even secure 40% of the seats. It won almost 750 seats out of 1,771 in 8 out of 11 provinces. Its success was restricted to Hindu-majority provinces only.

As for the results for the Muslim League, they were greatly disappointing. Out of 491 Muslim seats, it could only get 106 and 26 of them were taken by Congress. Hence, the final success of the elections was named in the favor of Congress, which gained majority in Bihar, Orissa, Madras and U.P and other regions.

The Congress didn't set up ministries for about four months demanding British government to not interfere in its legislative affairs. Discussions between them took place, and at last, the British agreed without making any formal amendment to the Government of India Act 1935.

As a result of which, Congress ministries were formed in July 1937 but with bitter policy against Muslims: Hindi became the national language, Congress flag became the national flag, and Bande Matram became the national anthem. A strict prohibition was laid on cow slaughter. The singing of Bande Matram, taken from the novel of Chandra Chatterji, was started in schools. Construction of new mosques was banned and Muslims were harassed while they offered prayers.

