CONSTITUTION AND RIGHTS FOR MINORITIES

The Constitution of Pakistan guarantees fundamental rights, including equality of status, opportunity before law, social, economic and political justice, and freedom of thought, expression, belief, faith, worship and association, subject to the law and public morality to its citizens.

Pakistan is a country with amalgamation of various cultures, ethnicities, languages, religions, sects etc. It was created on the principles of a democratic nation, which would ensure that, "everyone has the right to take part in the government of his country, directly or indirectly or through freely chosen representatives."

The Constitution of Pakistan assures protection and support to minorities in the country. Non-Muslim citizens are allowed to follow the laws of their religions.

Pakistan's Constitution clearly states in article 20 “(a) every citizen shall have the right to profess, practice and propagate his religion; and (b) every religious denomination and every sect thereof shall have the right to establish, maintain and manage its religious institutions."

Article 27 states that no one can be discriminated against on the basis of religion or any other distinction in the appointment in the service of Pakistan.

According to Article 36, the state shall safeguard the legitimate rights and interests of minorities, including their due representation in the federal and provincial services. A five percent quota is reserved for non-Muslim Pakistanis in the civil services of the country.

The constitutional promise to include non-Muslim Pakistani citizens in the electoral and legislative process is met by electing minority members in different houses of the legislature in Pakistan and its provinces.

The Constitution of Pakistan guarantees political inclusion of minorities by reserving a quota in Parliament that is reserved seats in Senate, National Assembly and all Provincial Assemblies so that they can convey their standpoint.

The Government has reserved job quota for minorities in government services.

Article 51(4) of the Constitution reserves ten national assembly seats for minorities.

Article 106 also guarantees non-Muslim reserved seats in all Provincial Assemblies.

Parliament reiterated its resolve to mainstream minorities in its promulgation of the Elections Act, 2017.

Section 48 of the Act asks for special measures for the enrollment of non-Muslims and bounds institutions to give priority to any activity related to this effort.

Section 104 asks political parties to submit a priority list of non-Muslim candidates with their nomination papers and also provides detailed procedures for filling-up reserved seats.

