CHRISTIANS IN STRUGGLE FOR PAKISTAN

In the struggle for Pakistan, the minorities especially the Christians played a crucial role and cooperated fully with the Quaid e Azam. He told a delegation of the Christian parliamentarians on 20th November 1942 that;

'If you help the Muslim League to make Pakistan, we will never forget you after Pakistan comes into existence, the Muslims will never forget your contribution. The Christian minority will be a sacred trust for us and the protection of their lives and properties will be part of our duties.'

The Christian community in India felt closer to the All India Muslim League than the Congress, for a number of reasons.

Mainly because as a representative of a minority community, the All India Muslim League understood the problems of Christian community much better.

The second important reason was the trust the Christians had in the personality and ability of the Quaid e Azam to look after the interests of minorities in Pakistan.

In his meeting with the Dewan Bahadr S.P Singha, the Christian leader and the speaker of the Punjab Assembly at that time, on 18th April 1947, he called on the Christians to raise their voices in favor of Pakistan and believed with the help of Punjab's Christians, Pakistan would become a reality.

He said their help would be remembered by the Muslims generation after generation, as the Christians, who are people of Book, have a special affiliation with Muslims.

Subsequently, appearing before the Boundary Commission on behalf of the Joint Christian Board, an umbrella organization consisting of four Christian organizations, Mr. Singha emphasized the Christians' feeling of affinity and solidarity with the Muslims.

He said: 'Our people have been living with the Muslims for a long time. They trust the Muslims, they dress like Muslims... With Muslims they have a religious affinity.'

The Christian leaders tried to include the whole of a Punjab into Pakistan.

When it was impossible, they ensured that at least Western Punjab include into Pakistan, by all the Christian leaders voting in favor of Pakistan. When the vote was tied in the Punjab Assembly, Mr Singha, the speaker of the Punjab Assembly, cast his vote in favor of West Punjab and it became part of Pakistan.



There were 88 votes which were going to merge the whole Punjab in India but Christian votes played a vital role and turned the game of Punjab in favor of Pakistan.

Christian members and one additional vote of SP Singha as a Speaker of Legislative assembly of British India made a difference and Punjab merged in Pakistan.



