QUAID E AZAM AND MINORITIES

Quaid-i-Azam promised equal rights for all Hindus, Sikhs, Parsis and Christians even though they would be a minority in the newly established Muslim state and there are many known personalities belonging to minorities who fully supported the Muslim demand for a separate homeland.

The Quaid e Azam did not forget minorities and at the Constituent Assembly on 11th August 1947, under the chairmanship of a Harijan, Joginder Singh Mandal. Quaid e Azam said;

"You are free to go to your temples. You are free to go to your mosques or to any other place of worship in this State of Pakistan. You may belong to any religion, caste or creed (any system of principles or beliefs) that has nothing to do with the business of the State".

Quaid-e-Azam Muhammad Ali Jinnah in his address on 11 August 1947 highlighted the contributions of non-Muslim communities of Pakistan as "The commendable services of religious minorities along with our Muslim brothers is a glorious chapter in the history of independence movement of Pakistan."

He went on to state that there won't be any discrimination on the basis of caste or creed (belief) and all would be equal members of State.

This unambiguous (clear) statement suggested that rights of minorities would be protected in Pakistan as being the majority Muslim country.

This theme of equality was repeated again and again throughout his remaining short life. His choice of Mandal, as the first Law Minister is just one example out of that.

On 11th October 1947, speaking to the officers of the Armed Forces he said one question which had been going around his head was the treatment of minorities.

He said he would repeat it again and again in public and private statements that 'we will treat minorities with justice'.

Quaid-e-Azam was of the view that Pakistan had been created for the Muslim minority in India, and it understood the trouble and sufferings of minorities. Therefore, it will treat its own minorities with justice, equality and respect, and will not only be accommodating but also be generous towards its own minorities.

On 3rd February 1948 in Karachi, Quaid e Azam assured Parsi community that Pakistan would be true to its often repeated promises. He told them Pakistan is the fulfillment of dream of a nation which found itself a minority in the Indian sub-continent. Therefore Pakistan can never forget the minorities living within its borders.

He said in 1929:

All legislative in the country and other elected bodied shall be constituted on definite principles of adequate and effective representation of minorities in ever province without reducing the majority in any province to a minority or even equality.

"In any case Pakistan is not going to be a theocratic State to be ruled by priests with a divine mission. We have many non-Muslims, Hindus, Christians, and Parsis but they are all Pakistanis. They will enjoy the same rights and privileges as any other citizens and will play their rightful part in the affairs of Pakistan"
(Page 125 Jinnah Speeches and Statements 1947-1948, Oxford 1997)

While Speaking to Hindus on March 22,1948

"We guarantee equal rights to all citizens of Pakistan. Hindus should in spirit and action wholeheartedly co-operate with the Government and its various branches as Pakistanis."
(Page 153 Jinnah Speeches and Statements 1947-1948, Oxford 1997)

Pakistan's founder, Quaid e Azam Muhammad Ali Jinnah, demonstrated this belief when he appointed Sir Zafarullah Chaudhry, who was also the author of the Lahore Resolution in 1940 as Pakistan's first Foreign Secretary.

Pathan Joseph a prominent and sincere Christian whom Quaid e Azam appointed as the first editor of Dawn Newspaper.

