Constitution of 1973 Amendments

First Amendment to the Constitution of Pakistan came to an effect on May 4 of 1974. The First Amendment redefined the international and provisional boundaries, federal treaties of Pakistan, and naval treaties of Pakistan. The amendment eliminates and removed the references of East Pakistan after the recognition of Bangladesh.

Second Amendment to the Constitution of Pakistan became part of the constitution on September 17, 1974. It declared that Ahmadis as non-Muslims.

Fourth Amendment to the Constitution of Pakistan is an amendment that became part on November 21, 1975. The Amendment decreed the seats for minorities and non-Muslims representation to the government of Pakistan and the Parliament of Pakistan, to protect the minority rights in the country.

The Sixth Amendment to the Constitution of Pakistan adopted on December 22, 1976. The VI Amendment stated that Chief Justice of Supreme Court will be retired at the age of 65 and a High Court honorable judge shall be retired at the age of 62.

Seventh Amendment was also the last of seven amendments adopted on 16 May 1977, a month before the ending of the democratic government of Prime minister Zulfikar Bhutto. The Seventh Amendment orders and enables the people elected Prime Minister to obtain a Vote of confidence by the members of Parliament.

Eighth Amendment to the Constitution of Pakistan allowed the President to unilaterally dissolve the National Assembly and elected governments. The eighth amendment was drafted and later enforced by the technocratic-military government of General Zia-ul-Haq. The eighth amendment changed Pakistan's system of government from a parliamentary democracy to a semi-presidential system. The eighth amendment strengthened the authority of the President and also granted additional powers to dismiss the elected Prime Minister's government. These powers included the right, expressed in sub-section 2(b) inserted into Article 58, to dissolve the National Assembly but not the Senate.

Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution of Pakistan was a short-lived amendment to the Constitution of Pakistan, adopted by the Parliament of Pakistan in 1997 by the civilian government of Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif. It took power from the President of Pakistan to dissolve the National Assembly and dismissing the Prime Minister. The Constitutional Amendment was supported by both the government and the opposition, and was thus passed unanimously. With the enforcing of this amendment, Pakistan's system of government was shifted from Semi-presidential system to Parliamentary democratic republic system.

Seventeenth Amendment to the Constitution of Pakistan was an amendment to the Constitution of Pakistan passed in December 2003. This amendment made many changes to Pakistan's constitution. Many of these changes dealt with the office of the president and the reversal of the effects of the Thirteenth Amendment.

The Eighteenth Amendment was passed by the National Assembly of Pakistan on April 8, 2010, eradicated the power of the President of Pakistan to dissolve the Parliament unilaterally, turning Pakistan from a semi-presidential to a parliamentary and renaming North-West Frontier Province to Khyber Pakhtunkhwa. It was to counter the sweeping powers amassed by the presidency under military rulers and to ease political instability in Pakistan. The amendment bill was passed by the Senate of Pakistan on April 15, 2010. It was the first time in Pakistan's history that a president relinquished a significant part of his powers willingly and transferred them to parliament and the office of the prime minister.

