Constitution of 1956

The Constitution was adopted on March 23, 1956. With this Pakistan’s status as a dominion ended and the country was declared as the Islamic Republic of Pakistan. Constituent Assembly became interim National Assembly and Governor-General Iskander Mirza sworn in as the first President of Pakistan.

Constitution of 1956 Salient features

Written Constitution:
The 1956 Constitution of Pakistan was a written constitution, which consisted of 234 Articles, 13 parts, and 6 Schedules.

Preamble:
The preamble of the 1956 Constitution of Pakistan was based on objectives resolution.

Islamic Provisions:
Sovereignty belongs to Allah and no law should be made against Islam.

Islamic Republic:
Pakistan was declared as the Islamic Republic and it was made mandatory that only a Muslim could become the President of the country.

Unilateralism:
The 1956 Constitution was unicameral and National Assembly was to consist of 300 members. The age limit of a candidate for a seat in the National Assembly was 25 years. The Parliament consisted of only one house which was known as National Assembly.

Parliamentary form of Government
It provided a Parliamentary form of Government. The prime minister was head of the Government, and all the cabinet members were chosen from the Parliament. The members of the cabinet were accountable to the Parliament collectively. Any Muslim citizen of Pakistan, who was at least forty years old, could be elected as the President of Pakistan for the term of five years. No one was entitled to hold this office for more than two tenures. 3/4th members of the Assembly could impeach the president.

Federalism
The constitution provided for the federal form of government with three lists of subjects: federal, provincial and concurrent. The federal list consisted of 33 items, provincial of 94 items, and a concurrent list of 19 items. So, Federalism was provided by the 1956 Constitution of Pakistan. The federal legislation was to get precedence over provincial legislation regarding the concurrent list. In case of a conflict between federal and provincial governments, or between the provincial governments, the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court was to act as a mediator.

Fundamental Rights:
The 1956 Constitution of Pakistan also provided fundamental rights. The Supreme Court was responsible for the enforcement and could declare any law or order as null and void if it was against the fundamental rights. However, the President had the power to suspend fundamental rights in case of emergency.

Islamic Provisions:
Sovereignty belongs to Allah and no law should be made against Islam.

National Languages:
Urdu and Bengali were declared as the state languages. However, for the first twenty years, English was to continue as an official language. After ten years, the president was to appoint a commission to make recommendations for the replacement of English.

After 9 years Pakistan was able to frame its first constitution (1956). But it subsisted for 2 years 4 months and 19 days.

First Constitution of Pakistan was abrogated and Martial Law was enforced in the country.

President Sikandar Mirza abrogated the Constitution, dissolved the National and Provincial Assemblies, and declared Martial Law, on 7th October 1958.

