Constitution of 1973

National Assembly of Pakistan unanimously approved the Constitution of 1973 on April 10, 1973. Two days after, on April 12, 1973, the drafted Constitution received the assent of the President. It was proclaimed on August 14, 1973.

Constitution of 1973 Salient Features

The 1962 constitution was abrogated with the resignation of General Ayub Khan. A new constitution was approved on 14th August 1973 with overwhelming majority under the office of the then Prime Minister, Z.A.Bhutto.

Main Features

Parliamentary form of Govt.

Prime Minister as the head and real executive of government, Ordinances to be counter signed by the Prime Minister

Bicameral legislature

Independence of judiciary

Urdu as national language

Provincial autonomy guaranteed residuary powers given to the provinces

A clear and definite definition for Muslim was given.

An Islamic ideology council was set up for framing of Laws for Islamic injunctions.

Written Constitution:
The Constitution of 1973 is a written document. There are 280 articles and 7 schedules of the Constitution.

Federal Constitution:
The Constitution of 1973 is Federal constitution. It establishes a central government and the governments of the federating units, namely, the province of Punjab, Sindh, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and Baluchistan.

Rigid Constitution:
The Constitution of 1973 is rigid constitution in a sense that it requires Two-third majority of the parliament (National Assembly and Senate) for amendment in it.

Islamic Provisions of the Constitution:
The following are the Islamic provisions of the Constitution of 1973.
The Constitution of 1973 also names the country as the Islamic Republic of Pakistan.
Islam is the State Religion of Pakistan.
Sovereignty belongs to Allah Almighty.
Only Muslim could become President and Prime Minister of Pakistan.
Islamic way of life.

Direct Election System:
Direct Election System is another salient feature of 1973 Constitution of Pakistan. The members of the National Assembly and Provincial Assembly are selected through Direct Election.

National language:
The Constitution of 1973 provides for Urdu as the national language of Pakistan. Regional languages have also been provided full protection by the Constitution.

Fundamental Rights:
The 1973 Constitution guarantees fundamental rights to the citizens of Pakistan. Some of these areas under:
Equality of all citizens before the law.
Security of citizens and their properties and other belongings.
Right to acquire, hold or dispose of the property in any part of Pakistan.
Freedom of speech
Freedom of expression
Freedom of association
Religious Freedom
Right to adopt any lawful profession.

