Constitution of 1962

As constitution was required to run the country, after almost four years of General Ayub Khan rule in the country second constitution was introduced. The 1962 constitution came into existence and was implemented on June 8, 1962 which introduced the Presidential form of Government.

Salient Constitution of 1962

Written and Detailed Document
The 1962 constitution was written that consisted of 250 Articles and 3 Schedules. Thus it was comparatively detailed document. Keeping in view the lack of democratic values and established norms it was thought expedient to give a detailed code of constitutional law as could regulate the conduct of different political institutions.

Incorporation of Objectives Resolution
The preamble of the 1962 constitution contained the Objectives Resolution 1949.

Provision of parity of representation at the center
According to the constitution, the central assembly (national assembly) would contain an equal number of representatives both from East and West Pakistan. There would be a total of 300 national assembly members, 150 from each unit.

Federal System
Under the constitution of 1962 federal system was adopted. The powers of the central government were enumerated in the Federal List while all the residuary powers were given to the provinces so as to meet the demand of provincial autonomy. However, within this federal structure, the central government was made domineering even at the cost of provincial autonomy. Besides in the administrative matters, centralism was clearly reflected. The provincial governors were the appointees of President and accountable to him.

Hence the provincial executive was under the control of the center. This centralism bore more disastrous results in respect of provincial autonomy. Consequently, the federal structure practically seemed unitary due to which the demand of provincial autonomy became more popular and widespread which threatened solidarity in the later stage.

Presidential form of Government
According to the 1962 constitution, it would be a presidential form of government in Pakistan. The president would be the head of the executive as well as the head of the state. The president enjoyed the power to issue ordinances that would take the shapes of law. No court and legislature would challenge presidential orders. The president could appoint and remove ministers and provincial governors. The president could veto any law made by the national assembly. Only a citizen of Pakistan with an age over 35 years would be eligible for the post of president.

Presidential form of Government
All the executive authority was vested in the President who was unanimously responsible for the business of the central government. The president also enjoyed certain legislative, military and judicial powers. The provincial set up also followed the central structure. In short, it was the President who was all in all.

Unicameral/One House Parliament
The 1962 Constitution provided unicameral legislature/one House Parliament at the center (the National Assembly) with an equal number of representatives from each province. Its total strength was raised upto 313, who were elected by the electoral college of Basic Democrats. Besides, certain seats were also reserved for women. Its term was 5 years, which was fixed. The members were elected on the basis of parity of representation between East and West wing. The proceedings of the Assembly might not be challenged in any court of law. Unlike the previous practices the members of the cabinet were not the members of the legislature.

Indirect Selection
It was a new innovation in the 1962 constitution. It was a general impression that one of the causes of the failure of the constitutional machinery was the direct election without proper and necessary political education and training. Hence this constitution provided indirect method of election for President and for the legislative assemblies. Accordingly, the primary voters would elect the Basic Democrats who had then to elect the representatives to higher positions.

Fundamental Rights and Principles of Policy
In the original constitution there was no list of fundamental rights. It was due to the first amendment in the constitution in 1963 that these were included and made its part. The list of fundamental rights contained almost all the rights secured to its citizens by a modern state. The principles of policy were also incorporated in the constitution. Most of the Islamic provisions were made the part thereof. These principles of policy dealt with such matters as Islamic way of life, national integration and solidarity, social welfare, protection of the rights of minorities, development of backward areas etc.

Although the 1962 constitution of Pakistan had transferred several responsibilities to the provincial governments but in actual practice the central government or its representatives used to exercise these powers.

