Natural Resources & Agriculture Overview

Natural Resources

Minerals

Rivers

Canals

Forests

Animals

Agriculture

Crops

Natural Resources

The resources that are endowed by the nature to the country and its people are called National Resources, e.g., Mineral resources, rivers, forests and animals. Agricultural lands hold key to development and prosperity of a country. The rate of development and prosperity of a country depends on efforts to make use of it. Effective management and human efforts are needed to avail them. Modern technology is also required to make use of it.

Natural Resources - Minerals

Pakistan is blessed with considerable mineral resources. Some of them are explored but much remains to be done for the search for more. Some important resources are discussed here.

Natural Resources - Minerals: Iron Ore

Iron Ore is used for industry, especially steel industry. Iron ore is found in various regions of Pakistan including Nokundi, Chiniot, Kalabagh the largest one, Haripur and other northern areas.

Iron ore is among the top five minerals found in Pakistan. The Kalabagh iron deposit is one of the largest in the country.

In February 2015, reserves were found in Chiniot, around 160 kilometres northwest of Lahore, by a Chinese group, the Metallurgical Cooperation of China.

Natural Resources - Minerals: Chromites

Chromites is used in preparing other metals, leather tanning, making of steel products, armament and stainless steel. Sizable deposits of this mineral are found at Muslimbagh, district Killa Saifullah. Lasbela, Khuzdar, Kharan and Chaghi districts have chromite reserves. Private sector has been engaged in mining this mineral.

Natural Resources - Minerals: Gypsum

Gypsum is used for plaster of Paris, Paints and Cement.

The main Gypsum deposits occur in the tribal areas of Dera Ghazi Khan District. The deposits occur in the north-south trending ridges that form the foot-hills of the Suleman Range, West of Dera Ghazi Khan.

Natural Resources - Minerals: Coal

Pakistan has coal deposits in Sindh, Punjab and Baluchistan. The total coal resources of Pakistan are reported to be approximately 185 Billion tons. Coal is used in power generation. It is basically used as fuel.

Natural Resources - Minerals: Oil and Gas

Oil: Pakistan remains an importer of refined oil because of the low capacity of domestic refineries to process crude oil. It is a major source of energy. It is mostly imported from Iran and Gulf states.

Gas: It is itself a source of energy and fuel, and also used as a source of power generation.

Natural Resources - Minerals: Uranium

Uranium: It is the basic element for atomic power, indispensable for the defense. Uranium deposits were found in several locations in Pakistan. The Atomic Energy Minerals Centre (AEMC) in Lahore was responsible for the exploration and mining operations. The Siwalik Hills, west of Dera Ghazi Khan, was indentified as the most promising location. Pakistan does not have high grade uranium ore in the country. It is well known that Pakistan is not a major uranium producing country.

