Industrial Development

Industrialization is the key to economic development and overall prosperity. Without it no economy can grow. It is the backbone of a strong and stable economy. It is the basis of modernization and development of the state.

It is a must for prosperity and development.

Industrial Development: Major Industries

Textiles: It is major industry based on agriculture, heavy textile industry caters to domestic and external market. Major Centers are Faisalabad, Multan, Lahore and Karachi. Woollen Cloth is manufactured in Karachi, Lawrencepur, Multan, Bannu and other cities of Pakistan.

Sugar: Pakistan has made tremendous progress in this industry. It is a food item, located in Sindh and Punjab.

Cement: This industry has gone through major expansion. Over 20 factories are established in the public and private sectors which cater to Pakistani needs. Still it is imported in limited quantity.

Vegetable Ghee: Cooking oil is a major food item. There is much expansion over the years both in private and public sectors although some raw material for making cooking oil is imported.

Iron and Steel: Steel Mill near Karachi was set up and major problem was that of raw material. The iron ore found in Pakistan is very poor in quality. Steel rolling units and iron related factories exist in different parts of Pakistan.

Paper: Major paper industry was in East Pakistan, which was lost in 1971. We had to face shortage of locally made paper after 1971. Now this industry is located in Noshera, Charsada, Gujranwala, Lahore, and Gharo. Some quality paper has to be imported.

Machine, tools: Heavy Mechanical Complex (HMC) Taxila serve this purpose. HMC was set up with Chinese cooperation. Machinery, industrial equipment, engineering goods, engines, machinery for sugar, cement, and fertilizer industry is prepared here.

Defence Industry: Wah Ordinance Complex is established for armaments.

Other Important Industry: Fertilizer, Tobacco and cigarettes, Oil Refineries, Cars and Tractors production, Shipbuilding: Karachi Shipyard.

Cottage Industry: Industries established on small scale, involving a household or small number of people, use of limited resources, having less investment are called small or cottage industries e. g., Carpets, sports goods, toys, handicraft etc.

