Natural Resources - Rivers

Rivers: The river system of Pakistan is consisted of Indus and other associated rivers. We have a canal system and the most important one is the Indus Basin project.

What we require is the proper management of water, its conservation, effective use, storage, dams and flood control.

Pakistan linked its rivers through a canal-link system. Pakistan's irrigation system, built by the British in the 1800s, is a complex network that brings water from the rivers to the canals and, in turn, through distributaries.

The Indus Basin Project is a water control project that resulted from a treaty, Indus Waters Treaty, signed between India and Pakistan in 1960 that guaranteed that Pakistan would receive water from the Indus River independent from upstream control by India. Indus Waters Treaty was signed on September 19, 1960, between India and Pakistan.

Water is dangerous if it is too much, it become a problem if it is too little. It is used for Agriculture where it is the backbone of agro-economy (Agro-based industry would mean any activity involved in cultivation, under controlled conditions of agricultural). It is also a cheapest source of hydroelectric Power generation.

Major Rivers of Pakistan

The river system of the country is originated from the snow-covered Karakoram and Himalayan range.

River system of Pakistan mainly comprises of five rivers that pass mostly through the Punjab province; therefore the name 'Punjab' 'panj' meaning five and 'aab' meaning water.

The five main rivers of Pakistan are;
Jhelum,
Chenab,
Ravi,
Sultej
Indus

Being the 3rd largest agricultural economy in the whole world, Pakistan's rivers are the most important sources of water that are used in agriculture for all domestic usage and in the irrigation system.

Rivers: Specific Descriptions

Indus River is taken to be one of the longest rivers in Asia. The Indus river is the longest river in Pakistan, originating from the Himalayan region. The Indus River fulfils the water requirements of Pakistan and is the main support for agriculture.

Jhelum River is a river that flows from the Indian-administered territory of Jammu and Kashmir, through the Pakistani-administered territory of Azad Kashmir, and into Pakistani Punjab.

Sutlej flows through the historic crossroad region of Punjab in northern India and Pakistan.

Chenab flows through Jammu and Kashmir. It is then joined by the Jhelum River at Trimmu, a flood control mechanism near Jhang and on moving further it merges with the Sutlej.

River Ravi like many other rivers of the region, originates in the Himalayas. It's also called 'The river of Lahore' since the city of Lahore is located at Ravi's eastern bank.

