Attraction for tourists

The tourists in our country have many attractions.
For instance Mountains, Snowcapped peaks, Fauna and Flora, Natural vegetation, Photography, Hiking, Snow falling, Steep slopes, Polo matches, River, Lakes and Glaciers, Beautiful valleys like Hunza, Skardu, Swat and Kaghan etc



Murree

Murree is a popular tourist station.
It is a mountain resort town, located in the Galyat region of the Pir Panjal Range, within the Rawalpindi District of Punjab, Pakistan.
It forms the outskirts of the Islamabad-Rawalpindi metropolitan area, and is about 30 km northeast of Islamabad.



Bhurban

Bhurban is a small town and a hill station in Punjab province, Pakistan. Bhurban is a tourist destination with unique flora and fauna, with a variety of species not found elsewhere in Pakistan. It is known for the hiking trail in the nearby Ayubia National Park.
The resort town is named after a nearby forest. It is located approximately 11 kilometres from Murree city.



Patriata

Patriata also known as New Murree is a hill station in northern Punjab. It is situated 15 kilometres south-east of Murree hill.
Patriata is located in Murree Tehsil which is a subdivision of Rawalpindi District. It is the highest point in the area. This place, which is 15 km away from Murree Hills, is famous for its chairlift that gives a bird-eye view of the Kashmir green hills. It is at the highest point of Murree Hills that subsequently makes it the highest point of Punjab as well.

The cooler climate in Patriata makes this hill station a favorable tourist location. The large tourist presence in Murree also makes Patriata a more attractive hub for many. Chair lift and cable car system allow visitors to access the highest points.
The area is heavily forested and there are many monkeys and leopards in the area.



Galyat

Galyat is almost 50-80 km north-east of capital, extending on both sides of the KPK and Punjab border, between Abbotabad and Murree.
The word itself means an alley between two mountains on both sides of which there are valleys. Many of the towns in the area have the word gali as part of their names, and are popular tourist resorts.



Swat

This stunning valley in the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province of Pakistan is something straight out of a fairy tale. The bright green fields and forests, picturesque villages, and rivers boasting shades of blue so clear and bright is all about Swat.
The true beauty of Swat can be found around the town of Kalam, which serves as a base to explore the beauty of the valley.



Places to visit in Swat Valley

Boyun Village Boyun, also known as a Green Top, is a short drive or manageable up-hill walk from Kalam town. Boyun is an easy day trip from Kalam.
Kandol and Spindhor Lakes These alpine lakes lie 2 hours away from Kalam.
Ushu Forest This well-preserved forest is full of deodar trees and is a fabulous place to get lost. The road that leads into the forest continues on to several villages set along the Kalam River.



Kalam Valley

Kalam is located in upper Swat at a distance of 96km from Mingora and 326 km from Islamabad. It is the most famous gem of a place to visit in Swat. There are breathtaking lakes, soaring mountains, picturesque valleys, green lush forests, and other natural attractions in Kalam. These wonders of nature make Kalam the most beautiful place to visit on everyone's list when they are in Swat.

The Kalam Bazaar is the main marketplace and commercial centre of the Kalam valley. Despite being small, Kalam Bazaar has hotels, restaurants, cafes, medical stores, and a good number of general stores. This Bazaar serves as a high street or Downtown for locals and tourists in Kalam and surrounding areas.



Kaghan Valley

Alongside the flow of the Kunhar River, the valley features glaciers, crystal-like clear lakes, waterfalls and frosty mountain streams. The Kaghan is famous for its scenic beauty and landscapes, resulting in its popularity as a summer time resort amongst locals and tourists.

It is one of the most splendid tourist area in Pakistan and located in Himalaya, north east of Hazara District KPK. The valley is full of natural attractions which are as follows:
Forests / Orchards, Mountains and Mountains peaks
Snow capped peaks, Snow falling, Shogran
Fishing in River Kunhar, e.g. Trout Fish, Lake Saif ul Maluk
Jeep riding, Glaciers, Waterfalls

Babusar Pass is an ancient route that connects Kaghan Valley with Gilgit-Baltistan; Chilas District.
This route remains open roughly from end June to October; rest of the year it is close due to heavy snow in the area.



Gilgit-Baltistan

The region Gilgit Baltistan has dynamic tourism potential and provides diverse tourism opportunities for domestic and foreign tourists across the world.
Being it home to the world's highest mountain peaks and glaciers fascinates the attention of adventurers, mountaineers, trekkers, travelers and explorers.

Fairy Meadows, named by German Climbers (German Märchenwiese, "fairy tale meadows" is a grassland near one of the base camp sites of the Mount Nanga Parbat, located in Diamer District, Gilgit-Baltistan, Pakistan.
Its majestic site in Gilgit Baltistan that offer an incredible view of Nanga Parbat, the world's 9th highest mountain peak, whereas the nights in the meadow unveils the stars up in the sky for those visiting.

Tourism can enhance the wellbeing of the residents of Gilgit-Baltistan by providing job opportunities and increasing current income.
Furthermore, the local residents can participate in tourism activities and earn their living by providing goods and services.



Hunza

Nestled in the Karakoram Mountain Range, Hunza comprises several valleys and colorful villages. It is the home of the most helpful, and hospitable people. Among the orchards, glaciers, meadows skirted by a majestic lake Attabad Lake, and wooden bridges, Hunza offers hypnotic sunset views.
The Altit and Baltit forts, Passu Cones, and Eagles Nest are some of the most popular areas among visitors.

Hunza is actually a massive district made up of numerous valleys and villages. One part of the ancient Silk road, some of the most beautiful sights in Hunza include :
Passu Cones The Passu cones are natural work of art and one of the most recognizable scenes in Pakistan. The most iconic view of the Passu is from the Karakoram Highway, about an hour's drive from Gilgit City.

Attabad Lake A lake that doesn't look real. Even when you're standing right in front of it. Attabad was born out of tragedy when a massive landslide occurred in 2010. The flow of the Hunza river was blocked, and the now-famous lake was created in its wake. Its bright-blue turquoise waters make it one of the most beautiful places in Pakistan.
Eagle's Nest The name comes from an upscale hotel/restaurant nearby, but you can drive up to the viewpoint to see one of the most epic sunsets in the Hunza Valley.

Skardu

In the extreme north of Pakistan, Skardu the central valley of Gilgit-Baltistan, is an epitome of beauty, serenity and wilderness.
After Jaglot (town located in the Gilgit District) on the Karakoram Highway, a narrow road turns towards Skardu. During the seven-hour journey, one is greeted with several streams, springs, and the hospitality of the local people.

Towering mountains, beautiful lakes, turquoise waters, and the world's highest baseball field are the salient features of Skardu.
The destination is the home to the second-highest plateau on the planet Deosai National Park, often referred to as the roof of the world, sprawling on an area of 4,117 metres.
From Satpara Lake to forts dating back to more than 600 years, and populous bazaars, Skardu definitely gives the tourists a run for their money.



Chitral

Chitral is a town situated on the Chitral River in northern Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Pakistan. Chitral is famous for its natural beauty, the simplicity of its residents and its unique culture. It is the most fascinating and charming place in the Hindukush range. Chitral is also famous because of the Kalash Valley.
Being only 2.5 hours from Chitral City, it's very easy to make it out to one of the valleys.



Kalash

The Kalash Valleys, comprised of Bumboret, Rumbur, and Birir, are home to the Kalash people, a religious and ethnic minority in Pakistan with their own beliefs, culture and language. The valleys they live in are certainly some of the most beautiful places in Pakistan not just for their natural splendor, but also for the beauty of the Kalash themselves.
The valley of Rumbur is particularly stunning. Here, kilometers of dusty road and mountains rumble alongside the Kalash River. The Kalash people live in wooden homes that cling to the high hills, and the women are particularly famous for their brightly-colored traditional dress and headwear that differs from anything else one can find in Pakistan.

The Kalasha are ancient tribe of Pakistan and they have their own way of life, their own religion, language, rituals and their own identity. This part of Pakistan is considered to be a well preserved ethnic and cultural museum.

