Pakistan and US Relations and War on Terror / Post 9/11 Foreign Policy of Pakistan

After the 9/11 attacks and US’s invasion in various countries to eradicate militancy, Pakistan became one of the most important strategic allies for United States.

Pakistan is named by the US as a major non-NATO ally in the war against terrorism.

Initially Pakistan tried to strike a negotiation deal with Taliban and al Qaeda members. However, when negotiations failed as President Pervez Musharraf confessed that the country had no option but to support United States as it had threatened Pakistan.

Simultaneously in 2001, US officials introduced a bill to lift all the sanctions, previously imposed on Pakistan under Pressler and Glenn amendments.

Diplomacy and war go side by side in deciding relations between countries. In normal diplomacy, countries enjoy bilateral agreements, concessions and mutual trust for the benefit of their peoples, but in a diplomacy characterized by coercion and tough conditions, a powerful country resorts to giving dictations such as ‘do more’ and sets demands, a timeline to fulfill the demand or otherwise face consequences on non-compliance.

Post 9/11 period, the US blaming Pakistan for providing safe havens to the militants. The United States policy for South Asia, was centered on authorizing more troops to Afghanistan and pressurize Pakistan to “do more” to control Taliban’s.

The United States relation with Pakistan has many episodes of ups and downs; it has complex, troublesome and transactional nature. Pak-US relations are based on instrumental exchange rather than ideological affinity; such type of relations is termed as “clientelistic”.

Although Pakistan has been a frontline state in the war on terror since the tragic events of September 11, 2001, there is no doubt that General Musharraf initially cast his lot with the United States mainly as a result of deep fears about what U.S. enmity might imply for Pakistan’s long-standing rivalry with India, its efforts at economic revival, its nuclear weapons program, and its equities in the conflict over Kashmir. Desirous of protecting Pakistan’s interests in these areas and to avoid Pakistan becoming a target in the campaign against terrorism.

Pakistan’s relationship to the “War on Terror” has been highly significant. Pakistan played a key role in facilitating the U.S.-led intervention in Afghanistan from shortly after 9/11. It had permitted the transit of material across Pakistani territory to U.S. forces in Afghanistan.

United States and Pakistan with some common goals, priorities differ noticeably. Pakistan has also been vitally concerned with the preservation of its territorial integrity.

