India and Pakistan Relations Since 1947 

The most problematic area of Pakistan’s foreign policy is the relationship with India. The relations have been strained since independence in 1947. There were periods of normal relations but generally it remained troubled marked with distrust and conflict. This bitterness caused three major wars in 1947-48, 1965 and 1971.

Limited conflicts and trouble at LoC (Line of Control) along with propaganda war are common practices. Tensions escalate when the troops on the border from both sides face each other. But with bilateral dialogue there is a hope on Kashmir and other issues. It is the only way to bring prosperity and peace for people of South Asia.

The Pakistan India relations are one of the most complex associations of its neighboring countries. The two countries share linguistic, cultural, geographical and economic links but due to political and historical reasons, the relations are tense.

1947 – Britain, as part of its pullout from the Indian subcontinent, divides it into secular but mainly Hindu India and Muslim Pakistan on August 15 and 14 respectively. The partition causes one of the largest human migrations ever seen and sparks riots and violence across the region.

Main source of conflict between India and Pakistan is Kashmir dispute. It should be resolved under the UN Resolutions. But India has declared it as integral part of it. Instead of having plebiscite, has blamed Pakistan for initiating insurgency in Kashmir. India claims that it is engineered by Pakistan and equates this with terrorism. The first India-Pakistan war over Kashmir is fought, after armed tribesmen (lashkars) from Pakistan’s North-West Frontier Province (now called Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa) invade the disputed territory in October 1947. The Maharaja, faced with an internal revolt as well an external invasion, requests the assistance of the Indian armed forces, in return for acceding to India. He hands over control of his defence, communications and foreign affairs to the Indian government